Structural Econometrics and Inverse Reinforcement Learning:
Inferring preferences and beliefs from human behavior∗
John Rust†

Pranjal Rawat‡

June 30, 2025

PRELIMINARY DRAFT: NOT FOR CIRCULATION

Abstract
This article, for Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance, summarizes the
literature on structural estimation of dynamic discrete choice models and points out close parallels to the rapidly growing literature on inverse reinforcement learning. Both literatures are
focused on inferring underlying preferences (and sometimes beliefs) of human decision makers
from observations of their states and actions.

∗

John Rust is grateful for support from his Georgetown University Professorship fund.
Professor, Georgetown University jf693@georgetown.edu
‡
PhD Candidate Georgetown University. pp712@georgetown.edu
†

1

Introduction

This article surveys methods for inferring preferences from observed behavior over time, focusing
on two parallel literatures: dynamic discrete choice (DDC) in structural econometrics (SE) and
“inverse reinforcement learning” (IRL) in machine learning (ML).1 Both literatures rely on the
presumption that the agents whose preferences we are interested in recovering are rational i.e. they
take a sequence of actions over time to maximize an internally perceived reward (or “utility”) given
their subjective beliefs of how their current actions cause or at least influence potentially uncertain
future outcomes that affect their rewards. SE labels this assumption rationality, while RL papers
typically describe optimal versus sub-optimal behavior and allow for noisy demonstrations (for
example, Ermon et al. (2015)). The goals of DDC and IRL are identical: to invert or infer the
underlying objective or reward function (and sometimes also their beliefs) that is presumed to
govern the behavior of agents from observations of the sequence of states and actions of a sample
of decision makers (DMs) over time.
In economics, structural models are used to test and evaluate economic theories, and to make
counterfactual predictions of the effect of changes in economic policies2 or other changes in the
environment (i.e. the “rules of the game”) on behavior and welfare (i.e. who is hurt and who
is helped by the change?). Structural models are distinguished from reduced-form models that
summarize behavior without inferring preferences. Reduced-form models require historical policy
variation for counterfactual predictions and cannot predict effects of novel policies. Structural
models, by internalizing the motivations of DMs, can produce plausible “out-of-sample” predictions
of the effect of economic policy changes on behavior and welfare even in the absence of past variation.
For example, Denmark has long had one of the world’s highest new car tax rates, with changes
only to encourage low-emissions vehicles. Gillingham et al. (2022) used a structural model of
equilibrium ownership and trading of cars in Denmark to predict the impact of reducing this
“registration tax”. The model predicts that by reducing the registration tax and increasing the
gas tax, it would be possible of Denmark to 1) improve the welfare of its citizens, 2) increase total
tax revenue from cars (registration plus gas tax), and 3) reduce total CO2 pollution. Structural
models provide a faster, cheaper way to evaluate policy changes than trial and error, serving as a
simulator to “crash test” new policy ideas.
IRL stems from ML and RL advances enabling intelligent agents for complex robotics and autonomous systems tasks. Much of ML’s success has been in supervised learning where algorithms
learn from labeled training data to predict outcomes. However supervised learning requires extensive labeled data and does not naturally handle sequential decision making where actions have
long-term consequences. RL trains agents to maximize a reward through trial-and-error interaction
with an environment. When a reward function is known RL algorithms can produce behavior that
1

To conserve space, we use many abbreviations throughout this article. Readers may consult table 1 for a summary
of all abbreviations and acronyms.
2
In this article, “policy” in the economic sense refers to government interventions (tax rates, regulations, etc.),
distinct from the RL/MDP usage where a “policy” is a decision rule mapping states to actions.

1

approximately maximizes the reward without requiring labeled examples. A good example is chess
where the reward function is known (1 for a win, -1 for a loss and 0 for a draw). RL has been
able to learn superhuman performance via self-play, i.e. repeatedly playing the algorithm against
itself resulting in performance that exceeds the best human and computerized chess players, see
e.g. Silver et al. (2018).3
Still, there are many challenging tasks in AI and robotics where it is unclear what reward
function should be used by RL to train intelligent behavior. Christiano et al. (2017) provide a
concrete example: “suppose that we wanted to use reinforcement learning to train a robot to clean
a table or scramble an egg. It’s not clear how to construct a suitable reward function, which
will need to be a function of the robot’s sensors” and the option of “manually programming their
behavior has become increasingly challenging and expensive.” Osa et al. (2018). IRL circumvents
this by inferring a reward function from limited expert demonstrations. RL can then use the inferred
reward to train behavior more rapidly and cheaply across scenarios beyond the demonstration data.
The result is intelligent behavior consistent with human preferences, including situations outside
the training set.
An early practical success was inverse optimal control (IOC), a related approach originated by
Kalman (1964). Mombaur et al. (2010) used IOC to transfer natural human locomotion patterns
to humanoid robots. They collected motion capture data of humans walking to targets in five
scenarios and inferred a cost function minimizing deviation between model and observed paths. This
cost function generated natural robot locomotion to new targets, transferring human movement
principles without manual specification. More recently, Barnes et al. (2024) used Google Maps trip
data to infer travelers’ route preferences reflecting trade-offs between traffic, distance, hills, safety,
and scenery. They massively scaled IRL to estimate a route preference function (360M parameters,
110M trips) enabling RL to generate recommendations achieving 16-24% improvement in global
route quality, and to the best of our knowledge, represents the largest published study or IRL
algorithms in a real-world setting to date.4
One limitation of classical IRL is that many real tasks are difficult for humans to demonstrate
directly. For instance, training a conversational AI assistant requires demonstrating high-quality
responses across thousands of diverse topics, an impractical data collection task. Reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) sidesteps the need for full demonstrations by eliciting preference judgments over pairs of candidate responses, fitting a reward model to match those preferences,
and then running RL against the learned reward (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022). The
most impactful application has been aligning large language models like ChatGPT and GPT-4.
3
Russell and Norvig (2022) note that supervised learning of chess is limited by the “relatively few examples (about
108 ) compared to the space of all possible chess positions (about 1040 )” whereas RL can learn through self-play without
requiring labeled examples.
4
While 110 million observations may not seem “limited”, it is a tiny fraction of all trips navigated using Google
Maps. Jeon et al. (2021) cites additional examples where “defining a reward function beforehand is particularly
challenging and IRL is simply more pragmatic.” These examples include robotic manipulation, autonomous driving,
and clinical motion analysis. See Zhao and Liang (2023) who used Adversarial IRL (AIRL) to estimate contextdependent route preferencs using data on trips by taxi drivers in Shanghai.

2

Ouyang et al. (2022) showed that a 1.3 billion parameter model fine-tuned with RLHF (InstructGPT) was strongly preferred by human evaluators over the much larger 175 billion parameter base
model (GPT-3), demonstrating that alignment with human preferences matters more than raw
scale.5
We note this survey’s relation to other work on related topics. Kang et al. (2025) provided
mathematical validation that DDC models are equivalent to maximum entropy IRL. Iskhakov
et al. (2020) and Igami (2017) provides a conceptual discussion of AI and structural estimation
focusing on model-based RL approaches such as AlphaGo. On the ML side, Arora and Doshi
(2021) comprehensively survey IRL methods but without connection to econometrics. Extensions
to IOC using deep learning are covered in Abbeel (2016) and connections between IOC and IRL are
discussed in Azar et al. (2020). van Cranenburgh et al. (2022) survey machine learning for choice
modeling, a related but distinct area from DDC structural estimation. Recent surveys on RLHF
methods and applications include Kaufmann et al. (2023) and Abdelnabi et al. (2024). For broader
context on machine learning in economics, see Athey and Imbens (2019) and Mullainathan and
Spiess (2017), their focus is on supervised learning. Applications of RL in economics and finance
are surveyed by Charpentier et al. (2021) and Atashbar and Zhao (2023), with emphasis on applied
examples. For comprehensive treatments of DDC methods, see Aguirregabiria and Mira (2010)
and Keane et al. (2011). The MDP foundations underlying both DDC and IRL are covered in
Puterman (1994) and Rust (1994).
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on dynamic
programming and Markovian decision processes, the common ancestor of both SE and RL, including
value functions, the Bellman equation, and RL algorithms. Section 3 describes DDC estimation
methods and the identification problem. Section 4 summarizes IRL methods and their relation
to DDC. Section 5 develops the mathematical foundations of reinforcement learning from human
feedback and proves its equivalence to DDC and maximum entropy IRL. Section 6 contrasts the
two literatures and discusses unsolved problems.

2

Background on DP and MDPs

The SE and RL literatures both build on a body of work that provides a recursive characterization of optimal sequential decision making under uncertainty, commonly referred to as dynamic
programming the name coined by one of the prominent early contributors to this theory, Bellman
(1957). We will briefly review a special class of DP problems known as stationary, infinite horizon
Markovian Decision Problems (MDP) introduced by Bellman and Howard (1960) that is the predominant underpinning of SE and RL and we refer the reader to Bertsekas (2017) for a first rate
5
The RLHF process for InstructGPT followed three steps: (1) supervised fine-tuning on high-quality human
demonstrations to create a better baseline, (2) training a reward model on human rankings of model outputs (using
the Bradley-Terry preference model), and (3) optimizing the policy via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with
KL regularization to prevent the model from deviating too far from the supervised baseline. See Section 5 for the
mathematical formulation.

3

Table 1. List of abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviation
AI
AIRL
AGI
AL
BC
BIRL
CCP
CCS
DDC
DM
DNN
DP
DSE
DU
EU
IOC
IL
IRL
MCMC
MDP
ML
MPE
MPEC
NFXP
PI
RFE
RL
RLHF
RTDP
SA
TD

Full Name
Artificial Intelligence
Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Artificial General Intelligence
Apprenticeship Learning
Behavioral Cloning
Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Conditional Choice Probability
Conditional Choice Simulator
Dynamic Discrete Choice
Decision Maker (Agent)
Deep Neural Network
Dynamic Programming
Dynamic Structural Estimation
Discounted Utility
Expected Utility
Inverse Optimal Control
Imitation Learning
Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Markovian Decision Process
Machine Learning
Markov perfect Equilibrium
Mathematical Programming with Equilibrium Constraints
Nested Fixed Point
Policy Iteration
Reduced Form Estimation
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
Real Time Dynamic Programming
Successive Approximations
Temporal Difference

treatment of DP and MDPs.6
MDPs are defined by 1) a state space S, 2) an action space A, and 3) the objects {r, p, β}, where
6

Note that DP and MDPs involve the optimization of discounted utility which was introduced by Samuelson
(1937) combined with the expected utility concept introduced by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) for problems
involving uncertainty. Though Samuelson “had concerns about its its descriptive realism, and it was never empirically validated as the appropriate model for intertemporal choice” (Frederick et al. (2002)), and laboratory tests
including the famous Allais Paradox (see Machina (1987)) constitute evidence against the hypothesis of expected
utility maximization, the MDP framework remains highly relevant for modern work in economics and AI and other
areas because MDPs are sufficiently flexible to provide good approximations to a huge range of sequential decision
problems. Though there is research on “recursive utility” that relaxes the discounted utility and expected utility assumptions, there are unsolved challenges in applying recursive methods to characterize and numerically approximate
optimal strategies for “non-separable” problems.

4

r(s, a) is the reward or utility function providing the payoff to a decision maker (DM), p(s′ |s, a) is
a transition density for next period’s state when the state is s and action is a and β ∈ (0, 1) is a
discount factor. To simplify exposition we assume that both S and A are finite sets, with |S| and
|A| elements, respectively.7 The DM is presumed to choose a policy π where π(a|s) specifies the
probability of taking action a in state s.8 For any s ∈ S the support of π(·|s) is restricted to a
subset A(s) ⊂ A of choices that are feasible for the DM to take in state s. When a policy is pure
(deterministic) we write δ(s) ∈ A(s) for the action it selects in state s. The DM’s objective is to
choose a policy π to maximize the expected discounted stream of rewards given by
V (s) = max Vπ (s),
π

where Vπ (s) = Eπ

(∞
X

)
β t r(st , at )|s0 = s ,

(1)

t=0

where Eπ denotes the expectation operator over the Markov process {st , at } implied by the transition probability p and policy π. Bellman (1957), Howard (1960) and others proved that an optimal
value function can be defined recursively in terms of what is now known as Bellman’s equation
"
V (s) = max

#
r(s, a) + β

a∈A(s)

X

V (s′ )p(s′ |s, a) ≡ Γ(V )(s),

(2)

s′ ∈S

so V is the fixed point V = Γ(V ) where the operator Γ(V ), known as the “Bellman operator”, is
the function of s implicitly defined by the right hand side of (2). The Bellman operator can also
be shown to be a contraction mapping (so for any vectors V, W ∈ R|S| we have ∥Γ(V ) − Γ(W )∥ ≤
β∥V − W ∥ where β is less than 1 and ∥ · ∥ is the Euclidean norm). This implies a unique solution
V to the Bellman equation exists. The optimal deterministic decision rule can be recovered from
V as the choice a∗ ∈ A(s) that attains the maximum in Bellman’s equation
"

#

δ ∗ (s) = argmax r(s, a) + β
a∈A(s)

X

V (s′ )p(s′ |s, a) .

(3)

s′ ∈S

Note that equation (3) implies that the optimal policy is generically a pure strategy, i.e. except for
rare cases of ties, for each state s there is a unique a∗ ∈ A(s) that maximizes the right hand side of
(3). The associated stochastic policy assigns probability one to δ ∗ (s), i.e. π ∗ (a|s) = 1{a = δ ∗ (s)}.
An MDP can be considered as a “game against nature” where “nature’s move” is encoded in
the transition probability p(s′ |s, a) and the optimal deterministic strategy δ ∗ can be considered as a
“best reply” to nature. This framework can be extended to dynamic games where there are multiple
rational players in addition to nature. In this setting the reward and transition probabilities for
7

The general theory carries over essentially unchanged if S or A have an infinite number or even a continuum
of elements provided certain boundedness and continuity conditions hold. However we will see that very different
methods are used to solve MDPs with large state spaces.
8
The term “policy” is commonly used for the decision rule π in the RL literature, but the term should be
distinguished from the term “policy” used in the introduction, i.e. economic policies such as tax rates, regulations
and so forth that can affect the decision rule π as we will discuss in section 3.

5

each player can depend on the actions of their opponents as well as nature. Maskin and Triole
(2001) introduced the concept of Markov Perfect equilibrium (MPE) which is a generalization of
the concept of Nash equilibrium in static games where each player’s strategy is a best reply to all
of their opponents and nature. A MPE is defined by the solution to a system of Bellman equations,
one for each player (except nature). Unlike the single Bellman equation in a single agent game
against nature, this system of Bellman equations can have multiple solutions, corresponding to
multiple MPE. Further, MPE strategies can be mixed whereas the optimal policy in a single agent
MDP is generically pure. There are no known algorithms that are guaranteed to find even a single
MPE, since unlike the single agent case, the system of Bellman equations is no longer a contraction
mapping.9 We now summarize several standard algorithms for solving the Bellman equation in the
single agent setting.
2.1

Successive Approximations

As is well known, any contraction mapping on a Euclidean space has a unique fixed point, and the
contraction property guarantees that the method of successive approximations i.e. the sequence
{V (k) } given by V (k) = Γ(V (k−1) ), for k = 1, 2, . . . starting from any initial starting guess V (0) will
converge to the fixed point V . Successive approximations converge to V at a geometric rate in β
and can be very slow when β is close to 1.
2.2

Policy Iteration

In many cases, the policy iteration (PI) algorithm (Howard, 1960) provides a much faster method
for solving the MDP. This algorithm cycles between policy valuation and policy improvement steps.
At iteration k of the PI algorithm there is a candidate deterministic decision rule δ (k) (s). The policy
valuation step calculates the value implied by this decision rule as Vδ(k) ∈ R|S| as the solution to
the linear system
Vδ(k) = rδ(k) + βEδ(k) Vδ(k) ,

(4)

where rδ(k) ∈ R|S| is the vector whose sth element is r(s, δ (k) (s)) and Eδ(k) is the |S| × |S| matrix
whose element in row s and column s′ is given by Eδ(k) (s, s′ ) = p(s′ |s, δ (k) (s)). It is easy to
show that for any feasible deterministic rule δ the matrix Eδ is a Markov transition probability
matrix with matrix norm ∥Eδ ∥ = 1, which implies that equation (4) has a unique solution given
by Vδ(k) = [I − βEδ(k) ]−1 rδ(k) .10 Given the value Vδ(k) the policy improvement step calculates a new
decision rule δ (k+1) given by the right hand side of equation (3) except with Vδ(k) substituted for
V . If δ (k+1) = δ (k) then policy iteration has converged and it is not hard to show that Vδ(k) = V ,
the unique solution to Bellman’s equation (2). Puterman and Brumelle (1979) showed that PI
9
Iskhakov et al. (2015) introduced the recursive lexicopgraphical search (RLS) that can provably find all MPE in
the subclass of dynamic directional games.
10
Alternatively we can show that the policy-specific Bellman operator Γδ(k) (V )(s) = r(s, δ (k) (s)) + βEδ(k) V (s) in
equation (4) is a contraction.

6

is mathematically equivalent to using Newton’s method to find a zero of the function F (V ) =
V − Γ(V ). It is well known that Newton’s method is quadratically convergent, and in fact for
discrete MDPs, PI converges in a finite number of iterations and typically the number of iterations
is quite small, regardless of how close β is to 1. The main downside of PI is that for problems
where the state space is large, the work required to solve the linear system (4) for Vδ(k) at each
policy valuation step involves O(|S|3 ) operations. Thus, in the absence of sparsity or other “special
structure” for the matrices Eδ(k) , alternative algorithms must be relied on for problems where the
number of states |S| exceeds several hundred thousand.
2.3

Avoiding the Curse of Dimensionality with function approximation

The computational burden of solving an MDP when the state space is large was recognized early on:
Bellman referred to the problem as the curse of dimensionality. For example, in problems where
s is a continuous vector in Rd , if we approximate Bellman’s equation using interpolation with a
finite grid N points in each dimension, then |S| = N d and the total work to solve the MDP is
O(N 3d ), which increases exponentially fast in d. Even when the state space S is naturally discrete
and finite, |S| can be very large: for example in classic board games such as chess, the number
of possible states (board positions) is estimated to be approximately 1044 . Thus it is infeasible to
use PI or SA to try to solve finite state approximations to MDPs when the true state space S is
sufficiently large.
Bellman and Dreyfus (1959) were among the first to recognize that one way to deal with the
curse of dimensionality is to approximate the value function parametrically. For example, we could
represent it using a linear combination of fixed basis functions or approximate it with a neural
network. Let ϕ denote the vector of parameters defining a parametric approximation to V with Vϕ
denoting the value function evaluated at parameter ϕ (e.g. following Benitez-Silva et al. (2000),
P
take ϕ ∈ Rm+1 and write Vϕ (s) = ϕ0 + m
ℓ=1 ϕℓ ψℓ (s) for chosen basis functions ψℓ ). Then an
alternative way to approximate the solution to Bellman’s equation is to convert it into a nonlinear
least squares problem where ϕ̂ is chosen to minimize the squared “Bellman residuals” over a grid
of points (s1 , . . . , sJ ) in S
ϕ̂ = argmin
ϕ

J
X

[Vϕ (sj ) − Γ(Vϕ )(sj )]2 .

(5)

j=1

The implied value function Vϕ̂ is an approximate solution to Bellman’s equation, (2). We can
also consider a modification of PI that we call parametric policy iteration (PPI), Benitez-Silva
et al. (2000), which uses a parametric approximation Vϕ̂(k) and finds ϕ̂(k) that mimimizes a least
squares criterion similar to (5) to approximate the solution Vδ(k) = rδ(k) + βEδ(k) Vδ(k) to each policy
valuation step k, (4). When Vϕ is approximated as a linear combination of “basis functions”, ϕ̂(k)
can be computed by linear regression rather than a nonlinear regression as in (5) when we replace
the nonlinear Bellman operator Γ with the linear operator Eδ(k) . Most of the modern methods
for solving high dimensional MDPs involve the use of function approximation, either for the value
7

function or the policy function, or sometimes both simultaneously.
2.4

Reinforcement Learning

This is a class of stochastic iterative algorithms for solving for the value function V and the
optimal policy π. A prominent example is Q-learning introduced by Watkins (1989) as a “general
formal model of an animal’s behavioural choices in its environment” and how it improves over
time in response to feedback. In this sense Q-learning embodies a type of “learning” though for
our purposes it can be viewed as a stochastic algorithm for solving MDPs since “Q” is just the
choice-specific value function in an alternative way of expressing the Bellman equation
Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + β

X

V (s′ )p(s′ |s, a),

(6)

s′

V (s) =

max Q(s, a).

(7)

a∈A(s)

Note that by substituting equation (7) into equation (6) we can represent Q as a fixed point
Q = Λ(Q) to a mapping Λ that can also be shown to be a contraction mapping. Q(s, a) is the
value of taking action a in state s and the optimal policy is to choose the action with the highest
Q(s, a), so V (s) is the largest Q value in state s. Watkins proposed a stochastic iterative algorithm
for updating Q given by

Qt+1 (st , at ) = Qt (st , at ) + αt


r(st , at ) + β max [Qt (s̃t+1 , a)] − Qt (st , at ) ,

(8)

a∈A(st )

where (st , at ) is the state and action taken by the DM at time step t, and s̃t+1 is a random draw from
the transition probability p(s′ |st , at ). Q-learning is a form of stochastic approximation (Robbins and
Munro, 1951). For convergence, the step size sequence {αt } must converge to 0, but at a sufficiently
slow rate to ensure the stochastic sequence {Qt } converges with probability 1 to Q = Λ(Q). As
shown by Watkins and Dayan (1992) and Tsitsiklis (1994), this Q is the unique solution to the
modified Bellman equations (6) and (7).11
Equation (8) does not specify how at is chosen: a typical choice is the greedy policy at =
argmax a∈A(st ) Qt (st , a). However a key condition for the convergence of Q-learning is that every
state-action pair (s, a) must be sampled an infinite number of times. This implies the usual exploration/exploitation tradeoff since suboptimal actions must be taken infinitely often for order for Q
learning to converge, but this need not happen under a greedy policy. One solution to this problem is to use a ε-greedy policy 12 that takes the optimal action at with probability 1 − ε, and with
11

P
P
The conditions on the step size are 1) t αt = ∞ and 2) t αt2 < ∞. Note αt = 1/t satisfies these conditions.
12
Greedy improvement steps (pure exploitation) go back to Bellman (1957) and Howard (1960). Watkins (1989)
introduced ε-greedy exploration, and Chapter 2 of Sutton and Barto (1998) formalized both notions for a broad
RL audience. The ε-greedy rule picks the greedy action with probability 1 − ε and otherwise samples uniformly
at random; although it does not minimize regret, it remains extremely popular because it is simple and provides
sufficient exploration in practice.

8

probability ε a randomly selected suboptimal action (i.e. an action a with Qt (st , a) < Qt (st , at )).
However unless ε converges to 0 with t, Qt will converge to a Q that does not satisfy the Bellman
equation (7) since an ε-greedy policy is suboptimal.
Haarnoja et al. (2017) introduced soft-Q learning building on the work of Ziebart et al. (2008) on
maximum entropy reinforcement learning that provides an alternative way to generate continuous
exploration, ensuring that all actions are explored infinitely often. These result in policies that
converge to mixed strategies that are self-consistent in the sense that the corresponding Q satisfy
a modified version of the Bellman equation (2) they refer to as the soft Bellman equation. The
term “maximum entropy” refers to the inclusion of an “entropy regularization” term in the agent’s
objective function to result in optimal policies that are generically mixed. Specifically, suppose
instead of the original objective in equation (1), we assume the agent’s objective includes an entropy
P
term, H(π(s)) = − a∈A(s) π(a|s) log(π(a|s)), so the agent maximizes
V (s) = max Vπ (s),
π

where Vπ (s) = Eπ

(∞
X

)
β t [r(st , at ) + σH(π(st ))]|s0 = s ,

(9)

t=0

where σ is the weight on entropy. Note that when σ = 0 we obtain the original MDP objective (1)
and the optimal π is generically pure and has 0 entropy, but as σ → ∞ the agent’s optimal policy
is simply to choose each feasible action with equal probability, resulting in a π with maximum
entropy. The solution V to the modified DP problem (9) turns out to satisfy a “soft Bellman
equation” which turns out to be identical to a version of the “smoothed Bellman equation” derived
by Rust (1988), see equations (16) and (15) of section 3.
Q-learning is described as model-free since, unlike SA or PI, it does not require explicit calculation of expectations using the transition probability p(s′ |s, a): instead all that is needed is be able
to simulate new states using p. In Watkins’ example of how an animal learns to adapt and thrive
in its environment, it would be the environment that “draws” the successor state st+1 needed to
implement the update in Qt in equation (8). When trained in this manner Q-learning is indeed
“model-free” and so are other RL algorithms that interact directly with the environment.13
In many situations Q-learning and related RL methods produce policies that are too noisy and
converge too slowly to be useful in practical real time applications, especially when the number of
states is large. As Jiang and Xie (2024) note, their “decisions can lead to undesirable outcomes,
especially at the early stages of learning when the algorithm has little knowledge of the environment.
This is not a problem when the environment is a simulator, but can lead to serious consequences
when people are part of the environment.” As a result RL training is increasingly done in simulation
environments with sufficient computer power to rapidly conduct many thousands or millions of
training iterations to produce a much better solution than could be achieved from limited realworld experience. However when models are trained using historical data, the distinction between
13

See Barto et al. (1995) for other examples of model-free algorithms for solving DP problems they refer to as real
time dynamic programming (RTDP).

9

“model-free” and “model-based” becomes nuanced, as we discuss in Section 4. If the algorithm
uses an explicit estimate of p(s′ |s, a) for planning, it is model-based; if it uses raw transition tuples
(s, a, s′ ) directly for TD updates, it remains model-free in RL terminology.14 The ability to simulate
from the true p(s′ |s, a) (or a good approximation to it) and for sufficient number of iterations, is the
key to producing good solutions using RL. In section 4 we return to this issue, showing that when
we have sufficient data on state/action transitions from past behavior IRL can use this information
to learn agents’ rewards in a way that is model-free.
Tabular (i.e. finite state/action) Q-learning, (8), is far too slow for MDPs with large state or
action spaces. One scalable solution to this problem to use a Deep Q-Network (DQN), which is a
deep convolutional neural network with parameters ϕ that parameterizes the Q-function as Qϕ (s, a)
similar to the way V is approximated by Vϕ in (5). This transforms the problem from iteratively
updating Q-values, as in (8) to using stochastic gradient descent to find ϕ that minimizes the mean
squared Bellman error ρ(ϕ) corresponding to (7) given by

ρ(ϕ) =

N
X

#2

"
r(si , ai ) + β

X
s′

i=1

max Qϕ (s′ , a)p(s′ |si , ai ) − Qϕ (si , ai )

,

(10)

a∈A(si )

over a grid of N points {(si , ai )}. However the problem with directly minimizing ρ(ϕ) over ϕ in
(10) is that forming a grid is challenging and the transition probability p may be unknown. Mnih
et al. (2015) introduced a stochastic iterative procedure that converges to a ϕ̂ that approximately
minimizes the Bellman error ρ(ϕ) and applied it to train effective strategies for classic Atari 2600
video games. Similar methods were subsequently used for board games such as chess, Go and
Shogu, see Silver et al. (2018). Simulated data were generated using self-play where each player
makes choices using a trial policy π resulting in a simulated data set D of (s, a, s′ ) sequences. Then
they used stochastic gradient descent to minimize an approximation to the squared Bellman error
(10) using the mean squared temporal difference error
"
ρ(ϕ) = E(s,a,s′ )∼D

2 #
r(s, a) + β max
Qϕ̂ (s′ , a′ ) − Qϕ (s, a)
,
′
a

(11)

where E(s,a,s′ )∼D denotes the sample average over the simulated data set D. Note that in (11) ϕ̂
is a lagged value of the network parameters from previous training iterations. Use of ϕ̂ instead of
ϕ in (11) is motivated by the fact that the combination of off-policy learning, bootstrapping from
subsequent estimates, and the use of a flexible nonlinear function approximator (the ‘deadly triad’)
can lead to instability and non-convergence as noted by Sutton and Barto (2020). Two innovations
14

The use of Q-learning to train chess strategies is an interesting intermediate case. Although the functional form
of p(s′ |s, a) for chess is unknown since this transition probability depends on the action of the opponent, Q-learning
remains “model-free” since it relies on the environment to produce the next state st+1 directly via self-play, without
explicitly modeling or using the game’s rules to calculate p(s′ |s, a). In contrast, an algorithm like AlphaZero that
uses Monte Carlo tree search explicitly uses the game rules for planning and would be considered “model-based”.

10

in the DQN avoided these problems. The first was experience replay, whereby transitions are
stored in a large “replay buffer” D. The network is then trained on mini-batches of transitions
sampled uniformly randomly from D, breaking the strong temporal correlations in the sequence
of observations (e.g. persistent streaks in certain parts of the state space), thereby stabilizing the
updates by conforming more closely to the i.i.d. assumptions underlying most stochastic gradient
methods. The second innovation is the use of a separate target network with parameters ϕ̂, so
that Qϕ̂ is a lagged version of the current network Qϕ . Keeping the target network’s parameters ϕ̂
fixed for several iterations of the overall stochastic descent algorithm, keeps the optimization target
stable, preventing the current network from attempting to converge to a non-stationary objective.
Together, these innovations mitigated the deadly triad and enabled Q-learning to scale to very
high-dimensional problems that were previously intractable.15
Later studies confirmed that minimizing Bellman error in deep RL does not ensure recovery
of the optimal value function. Empirical results show that agents can achieve low Bellman error
on replay data while learning suboptimal policies due to overfitting and distribution shift Fu et al.
(2019). Theoretical work provides explicit examples where many Q-functions satisfy the Bellman
equation on sampled data but only one is optimal, and Bellman error can be minimized by poor
value functions in the finite data regime Fujimoto et al. (2022). Despite these gaps, deep RL results
in policies that exhibit human level and often superhuman levels of peformance in a variety of high
dimensional problems where standard methods such as value or policy iteration are infeasible.

3

Structural Estimation of DDCs

The development of new recursive methods for solving DPs and MDPs in the 1950s and 60s sparked
a revolution in economics because these tools enabled economists to model sequential decision making under uncertainty, dynamic strategic interactions, and dynamic equilibria in markets which are
key features of nearly all economic problems. Starting in the 1960s DP facilitated the development
of new dynamic economic theories that showed how expectations of the future affect the current
choices of rational forward looking agents, resulting in new dynamic economic theories embodying rational expectations Muth (1961). Since this new framework had the flexibility to predict a
wide range of behavior, the natural next step was to develop empirical methods for estimating and
testing how well these new theories can explain data. This lead to a new area of econometrics
that can be called dynamic structural estimation (DSE) which differed from existing econometric
methods that could be classified as reduced form estimation (RFE). The term “structural” refers to
15

Mnih et al. (2015) demonstrated that a single deep reinforcement learning agent could learn to play a diverse suite
of Atari 2600 games directly from raw pixel inputs and game scores. It reused the same neural network architecture
and hyperparameters across all tasks. Without any game-specific engineering, the DQN agent achieved human-level
performance in several games. Despite this achievement, it should be highlighted that they did not demonstrate that
their DQN converged to the optimal value function as the convergence of the approach is still an open question. Proofs
of convergence for stochastic RL algorithms involving function approximation do exist: Tsitsiklis and Roy (1997)
proved the probability 1 convergence for Temporal Difference (TD) methods in the case where Vϕ is parameterized
as a linear combination of basis functions.

11

the attempt to infer the underlying preferences and beliefs of economic agents rather than simply
summarizing their behavior, the main goal of reduced-form econometrics. In terms of the MDP
framework, we can consider an agent’s decision rule π(a|s) to be the “reduced-form model” because
it captures their behavior, whereas structural econometrics tries to infer the underlying structure
i.e. the preferences and beliefs {β, r, p} as well as the implied optimal decision rule π.16
Robert E. Lucas (1976) provide a practical rationale for why we do structural econometrics.
He argued that reduced-form econometric models produce misleading predictions of the effect of
economic policy changes, whereas structural models that estimate the underlying preferences of
consumers and the production technologies of firms are more likely to accurately predict the effects
of policy changes. Policy evaluation requires counterfactual predictions of how economic agents and
the economy will react to changes in economic policy and the economic environment. To explain
Lucas’s argument in the MDP framework, let ρ devote a set of environment or policy variables that
affect the preferences (or profits) and beliefs of economic agents. We can write the reward function
as r(s, a, ρ) and beliefs as p(s′ |s, a, ρ) to emphasize the dependence of these quantities on ρ. We
can solve the MDP model for different values of ρ to to make counterfactual predictions of how
behavior π(a|s, ρ) and welfare V (s, ρ) change in response to changes in ρ. As noted, when there
is insufficient variation in ρ (or we want to consider changes in ρ beyond the range of historical
experience), reduced-form methods cannot provide good estimates of π(a|s, ρ) as ρ changes, nor can
they predict how it affects welfare. However it is sometimes possible to know how ρ affects r(s, a, ρ)
and p(s′ |s, a, ρ) even when there has been little or no variation in ρ in the past. The introduction
discussed the example of new car taxation in Denmark discussed in the introduction where ρ is
the tax rate on new cars. Under the assumption that r(s, a, ρ) additively separable in (s, a) and
ρ Gillingham et al. (2022) used structural estimation to recover the component of r(s, a, ρ) that
depends only on (s, a), and with this, they could calculate r(s, a, ρ) for any other possible tax
rate ρ, due to the their assumption about its functional form. In contrast, we rarely have a good
prior known of how ρ affects the decision rule π(a|s, ρ) but structural estimation of r(s, a, ρ) and
p(s′ |s, a, ρ) enables us to calculate π(a|s, ρ) for any policy ρ by solving the MDP. These solutions
constitute counterfactual predictions of how car holding and trading behavior and welfare changes
in response to changes in the new car tax rate ρ.17
The earliest work on estimation of dynamic structural models includes Sargent (1978), who esti16

The earliest development of structural econometrics dates back to work at the Cowles Foundation in thee 1940s
where econometric methods were developed for inference on linear simultaneous equation systems which are static
models of market equilibrium. In this work the structure was the coefficients of linear market supply and demand
curves, whereas the reduced form were linear regressions that predict how equilibrium prices and quantities (p, q)
shift with various variables x that shift the supply and demand curves. This was the earliest work showing how it
could be possible to infer the structure (i.e. the coefficients of the supply and demand curves) using only data (p, q, x)
on the intersections of the supply and demand curves in different market states x.
17
Since changes in tax rates ρ aslo affect prices of new and used cars, a counterfactual prediction also has to
account for how ρ affects the entire equilibrium in the Danish car market, so both new and used car prices are
implicit functions of ρ. These equilibrium counterfactuals are also captured by the structural model of Gillingham et
al. (2022).

12

mated the dynamic linear quadratic model18 of firms’ demand for workers by maximum likelihood.
In the remainder of this section we provide a selective summary of the literature on structural
estimation of DDCs that has the closest connection to the literature on IRL. Key references include Rust (1987), Rust (1988), Rust (1994), Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002), and the survey by
Aguirregabiria and Mira (2010).
The goal is to infer the structural objects {β, r, p} from data on the trajectories of choices and
states on a random sample of individuals using a modified version of the finite state and action MDP
discussed in section 2. The modification is motivated by the statistical degeneracy of the optimal
decision rule δ ∗ (s) in equation (3), i.e. it is generically a pure strategy (i.e. deterministic function
of s). For most choices we actually observe, different individuals will choose different actions in the
same observed state s. In order to explain this heterogeneity in behavior, we consider a modified
MDP with an augmented state variable x = (s, ϵ) where the individual observes both s and ε
(and thus uses a pure strategy) but we only observe s but not ε, which is a vector of idiosyncratic
preference shocks that we do not observe. As a result, from our standpoint individuals appear to
be using a mixed strategy. If there is sufficient variation in the unobserved ε component, we can
derive a conditional choice probability (CCP) π(a|s) from the overall (pure) strategy π(a|s, ε) that
admits positive probabilities for all feasible choices a.
Building on the contributions of McFadden (1973) for static discrete choice models, we can
derive an especially simple expression for the CCP π(a|s) given by the multinomial logit model or
“softmax” function in the RL literature. Suppose the choice sets depend only on s and are finite,
and assume that for each s, ε is a vector with the same length as |A(s)| the number of actions,
so for ε(a) is the component of ε associated with action a ∈ A(s). Assume that the reward for
action a in state (s, ε) can be written as r(s, a) + ε(a). We call this the Additive Separability (AS)
assumption. We also assume that the transition density p(s′ , ε′ |s, ε, a) factors as g(ε′ |s′ )p(s′ |s, a),
for a conditional density g(ε′ |s′ ). We call this the Conditional Independence (CI) assumption.
Finally, if we assume ε has a multivariate Gumbel or Type 1 extreme value distribution given by
F (ε|s) =

Y

exp{− exp{−(ε(a) − µ)/σ}},

(12)

a∈A(s)

where we set µ = −σγ where γ is Euler’s constant, then E{ε(a)|s} = 0 for a ∈ A(s). We call this
the Extreme Value (EV) assumption. Let V (s, ε) be the optimal value of this MDP, the solution
to
V (s, ε) = max Vπ (s, ε),
π

where Vπ (s, ε) = Eπ

(∞
X

)
t

β [r(st , at ) + εt (at )]|s0 = s, ε0 = ε .

(13)

t=0

Under assumptions AS, CI and EV, we can write the Bellman equation (2) for V (s, ε) and show it
18

That is, the law of motion for st is a linear autoregression and r is a quadratic function of (st , at ).

13

has the representation
V (s, ε) = max [Q(s, a) + ϵ(a)],

(14)

a∈A(s)

where Q(s, a) is given by



Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + β

X

σ log 

s′

X

exp{Q(s′ , a′ )/σ} p(s′ |s, a).

(15)

a′ ∈A(s′ )

The derivation of (14) and (15) makes use of an important property of the extreme value distribution
for ε, namely that the expectation of V (s, ε) with respect to ε has an analytical expression given
by the so-called log-sum or “smoothed max function” V (s)
Z
V (s) ≡ E {V (s̃, ε̃) |s̃ = s} =
max [Q(s, a) + ε(a)] F (dε|s)
ε a∈A(s)


X
= σ log 
exp{Q(s, a)/σ} .

(16)

a∈A(s)

Using equations (15) and (16) we can derive a “smoothed Bellman equation” for V

V (s) = σ log 

(
X

exp [r(s, a) + β

X

)
V (s′ )p(s′ |s, a)]/σ  ,

(17)

s′

a∈A(s)

Equation (15) defines a “smoothed Q” as the fixed point of the smoothed contraction mapping
Qσ = Λσ (Qσ ), and (17) defines V as a fixed point of the smoothed Bellman operator (also a
contraction mapping) Vσ = Γσ (Vσ ). These operators are equivalent to the corresponding operators
for MDP without the state variable ε in equations (6) and (7) and it is not hard to show that Qσ
and Vσ converge to Q and V as σ ↓ 0.
The representation of V (x, ε) in equation (14) means that the decision rule π(a|x, ε) is isomorphic to a static discrete choice model where Q(s, a) + ε(a) is the utility/payoff from action a.
McFadden (1973) showed that the CCP π(a|s) is the conditional probability that the DM chooses
action a ∈ A(s) given the observed state s and has the classic multinomial logit formula given by



I Q(s, a) + ε(a) ≥ max [Q(s, a ) + ε(a )] F (dε|s)

Z
π(a|s) =
=

′

′

a′ ∈A(s)

exp{Q(s, a)/σ}
.
′
a′ ∈A(s) exp{Q(s, a )/σ}

P

(18)

It is easy to show that as σ ↓ 0, π(a|s) converges to a degenerate probability that equals 1 if Q(s, a)
is the largest Q value and 0 otherwise, i.e. to the optimal pure strategy π in equation (3) for
MDPs without the ε variable. If follows that the choice-specific values Q(s, a) in (15) and CCPs
π(a|s) in (18) are exactly the same as the “soft Q” values and optimal policy derived in the RL
14

literature under the assumption that agents care about entropy of the policy π, given in equation
(9) of section 2.4.
Equation (18) can be considered as the analog of the policy improvement step for MDPs in
equation (3). Is there an analogous equation for the policy valuation step (4) for regular MDPs
where the value for any policy π is the solution to a linear system? Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002)
showed that the value Vπ corresponding to any CCP π is given by
Vπ (s) =

X

π(a|s)[r(s, a) + E{ε(a)|s, a} + β

X

Vπ (s′ )p(s′ |s, a)],

(19)

s′

a∈A(s)

where E{ε(a)|s, a} is the conditional expectation of ε(a) given that action a is chosen in state
s under decision rule π. Under the extreme value assumption for ε, we have E{ε(a)|s, a} =
−σ log(π(a|s)). Using this, it is easy to see that the right side hand of (19) equals the smoothed
max function defining the smoothed Bellman operator in equation (17). Thus, we can solve the
smoothed Bellman equation Vσ = Γσ (Vσ ) using policy iteration just as in the case of MDPs, where
we cycle between policy valuation steps (19) and policy improvement steps (18) using the Qπ
implied by Vπ in equation (15). In fact, just as in the case of MDPs, policy iteration is equivalent
to Newton’s method for solving the system Vσ − Γσ (Vσ ) = 0.
Equation (18) implies that σ log(π(a|s)) = Q(s, a) − V (s) ≡ A(s, a), where A(s, a) is called the
advantage function in RL. Using A(s, a) we can rewrite the nonlinear fixed point equation (15) for
Q as a linear system depending on r(s, a) and log(π(a|s)),
Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + β

X X 
s′


−σ log(π(a′ |s′ )) + Q(s′ , a′ ) π(a′ |s′ )p(s′ |s, a).

(20)

a′ ∈A(s′ )

Equation (20) implies that we can decompose Q as Q(s, a) = Qr (s, a) + Qε (s, a) where Qr (s, a) is
the component of discounted value from observed rewards r and Qε (s, a) is the component from
unobserved rewards ε. Further substituting expression (19) in place of (17) in the equation for Q
in (15), we can show that Qr and Qε are each the solution to the following linear systems
Qr (s, a) = r(s, a) + β

X X

Qr (s′ , a′ )π(a′ |s′ )p(s′ |s, a)

(21)

s′ a′ ∈A(s′ )

Qε (s, a) = β

X X 


−σ log(π(a′ |s′ )) + Qε (s′ , a′ ) π(a′ |s′ )p(s′ |s, a).

(22)

s′ a′ ∈A(s′ )

This decomposition can be exploited to reduce the computational burden of estimating DDC models
as we will show below.
3.1

Estimation Methods for DDCs

The most common estimation method for DDCs is some form of maximum likelihood. Suppose we
observe a random sample of trajectories i.e. data on the consecutive states and actions taken by
15

N individuals {(sit , ait )|t = 0, . . . , Ti , i = 1, . . . , N }. Suppose that we smoothly parametrize (r, p)
using a vector unknown parameters θ, which we denote by rθ and pθ .19 Using the implicit function
theorem, we can show that Vθ and Qθ , the contraction fixed points given in equations (16) and
(15), are continuously differentiable function of θ. Using these fixed points and the logit formula
for π(a|s) in equation (18) we can write a full likelihood function for the data as a function of the
unknown parameters θ given by
L(θ) =

Ti
N Y
Y

πθ (ait |sit )pθ (sit |sit−1 , ait−1 ).

(23)

i=1 t=1

The smoothness of Vθ and Qθ in θ implies that the CCP πθ and the likelihood L(θ) are both smooth
functions of θ so the standard asymptotic efficiency properties of maximum likelihood apply.
Rust (1988) introduced the Nested Fixed Point algorithm (NFXP) to compute the maximum
likelihood estimator (MLE) of θ. It consists of a standard outer hill climbing algorithm to maximize
L(θ) over θ, but at each evaluation of θ it calculates the contraction fixed point Qθ = Λθ (Qθ ) that
defines the choice-specific values Qθ where Λθ is the operator defined on the right hand side of
equation (15). Notice that L(θ) depends on θ via Qθ . Su and Judd (2012) proposed an alternative
strategy for computing the MLE based on the MPEC algorithm that maximizes a likelihood L(θ, Q)
expressed as a function of (θ, Q), subject to the fixed point constraint Qθ = Λθ (Qθ ).20
Estimation of DDC models is often done in a two step fashion, where a parametric model of the
transition probability p(s′ |s, d) is estimated in the first stage using a partial likelihood that does
not involve the CCP π in (23), and in the second stage the parameters of r are estimated using
another partial likelihood involving only π, treating the estimated parameters of p as if they were
known. A final Newton step iteration for maximization of the full likelihood function (23) can be
done using the estimated parameters of p and r from steps 1 and 2 as starting values to obtain
fully efficient parameter estimates with the correct asymptotic covariance matrix, i.e. it accounts
for “first stage” estimation effort in the parameters of p.
The computational burden of NFXP stems from the need to compute the inner fixed point
Qθ = Λθ (Qθ ) for each trial value of θ in the outer hill-climbing algorithm that maximizes L(θ).
Newton’s method (e.g. policy iteration) is typically used to solve for Qθ (or alternatively for Vθ
in equation (19)). Even though Newton’s method converges rapidly, it requires O(|S|3 ) operations
per Newton/policy iteration step, making NFXP burdensome for large state spaces S. Therefore
alternative estimation methods have been proposed that reduce the total number of policy iteration
steps required to estimate θ.
Hotz and Miller (1993) proposed the “CCP estimator” for r that uses a non-parametric estimate
19

The discount factor β is often treated as known, though in some cases it is also estimated and thus part of θ.
Su and Judd (2012) claim that the MPEC alogithm is substantially faster than NFXP, but Iskhakov et al. (2016)
showed that this was due to using SA to compute the fixed point Qθ = Λθ (Qθ ) which is slow when β is close to
1. When Newton’s method is used to compute this fixed point, the cpu times for MPEC and NFXP are roughly
comparable with NFXP being faster on test problems with large sample sizes.
20

16

of π(a|s) to avoid repeated solution of Q over the search for θ that NFXP requires. Consider the
P
case where rθ is linear in parameters, i.e. we can write rθ (s, a) = r(s, a) ∗ θ ≡ K
k=1 rk (s, a)θk
for known functions ⃗r = (r1 , . . . , rK ) called features in the IRL literature. Then (21) implies that
Qr (s, a) = R(s, a) ∗ θ where R is the solution to
R(s, a) = ⃗r(s, a) + β

X X

R(s′ , a′ )π(a′ |s′ )p(s′ |s, a) = ⃗r(s, a) + βER(s, a),

(24)

s′ a′ ∈A(s′ )

where ER(s, a) is a shorthand for the conditional expectation of R(s, a) the middle of expression
in (24). It follows that we only need to solve (24) once using a non-parametric estimate of π̂ along
with Qε in (22) to serve as a “correction term” to obtain the following form for the CCP
πθ (a|s) = P

exp{R̂(s, a) · θ + Q̂ε (s, a)}
′
′
a′ ∈A(s) exp{R̂(s, a ) · θ + Q̂ε (s, a )}

,

(25)

where R̂(s, a) is the solution to (24) and Q̂ε is the solution to (22) using non-parametric first stage
estimators π̂(a|s) and p̂(s′ |s, a). The CCP estimator θ̂ maximizes the partial likelihood Lπ (θ) given
by
Lπ (θ) =

Ti
N Y
Y

πθ (ait |sit ),

(26)

i=1 t=1

where π is given in (25).21

Thus, when r is a linear combination of known features, we only need

to compute R̂ and Q̂ε once at the start of the estimation, requiring K + 1 solutions of systems with
|S| equations and unknowns, where K is the number of features. This can be further reduced to a
single solution if we assume that r(s, as ) is known for some “normalizing alternative” as ∈ A(s) as
we discuss further below in the section on identification of DDC models.
A cost of the CCP estimator is that it is less efficient than using NFXP to estimate the same
partial likelihood criterion (26) due to the noise in the first stage non-paramteric estimates π̂ that
are used to construct the Q̂ε function in (25). Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002) (AM) addressed this
problem by proposing an iterative estimator called nested pseudo likelihood (NPL) that uses an
initial non-parametric estimate π̂ to compute the value function Vπ̂ implied by this initial estimate
by solving for it in the policy valuation step in equation (19), which we denote as V̂θ,π̂ since it
depends both on π̂ and the parameters θ entering the reward function. AM then estimate θ̂ using
a pseudo-likelihood similar to (26) except that the CCP πθ (a|s) is evaluated using (18) using
estimated Q functions given by
Q̂θ (s, a) = rθ (s, a) + β

X

V̂θ,π̂ (s′ |s, a)p(s′ |s, a),

(27)

s′
21

See Chernozhukov et al. (2022) for a modified version of the CCP estimator that is “locally robust” i.e. it corrects
for sampling error in the first stage estimates of the functions Ĥ(s, a) and Qε (s, a).

17

Thus, the likelihood Lπ (θ) as depends implicitly on the first stage non-parametric CCP estimate
π̂, which can be regarded as a “nuisance parameter”. In principle, estimation noise in π̂ will
contaminate and affect the asymptotic covariance matrix for the parameters of interest θ. However
AM established a key zero Jacobian property that at the fixed point ∂V (s)/∂π = 0 which implies
that the first stage nuisance parameter π̂ is “Neyman orthogonal” with respect to the parameters
of interest θ in the sense of Chernozhukov et al. (2022). It follows that the asymptotic covariance
matrix for the NPL estimator of θ is unaffected by noise in the first stage π̂ and is the same as
π was known. Further, AM showed that NPL can be iterated: using θ̂, they can compute an
updated estimate of the CCPs π̂ = πθ̂ ) and repeat the policy valuation step to get a new set of
Q functions (27), and use these in the likelihood (26) to get an updated estimate θ̂. They refer
to NPL as “swapping” the policy iteration and maximization steps of the NFXP estimator (which
does maximization in the “outside” loop and policy iteration in the “inside” or nested fixed point
loop). Swapping the order of maximization and policy iteration reduces the total number of policy
iteration steps required to estimate θ. AM showed that if this iterative version of NPL converges,
it produces the same estimate θ̂ that NFXP produces from maximization of the partial likelihood
(26). Thus the NPL estimator is as efficient as NFXP but at lower computational cost, and it is
more efficient than the CCP estimator but at a higher computational cost.22
Bayesian approaches have been proposed for inference in DDC models using Markov Chain
Monte Carlo methods that simultaneously simulate the likelihood as well as stochastic simulations
to compute estimates of value functions that are similar to “Monte Carlo tree search” used by RL
algorithms such as the Q-learning algorithm discussed in section 2.4, see Imai et al. (2009) and
Norets (2009). There are also non-Bayesian simulation estimators such as Bajari et al. (2007) that
estimate θ as the value that minimizes the degree of suboptimality in observed actions relative to
other actions not taken using simulation estimates of Q function evaluated at the actions the DM
actually took and other actions not chosen.
3.2

Function Approximation Methods for Large State Spaces

When the state space S is very large (i.e. the state space is continuous or the number of states |S|
is in the hundreds of thousands or higher), all of the approaches discussed above that require one
or more solutions of large linear systems with |S| equations and unknowns (e.g. NFXP, CCP, NPL,
etc.) become computationally infeasible. An alternative approach is to use parametric methods
to approximate the value function V as Vϕ (s) = f (s, ϕ) where f (s, ϕ) is a member of a flexible
family such as neural networks where ϕ denote the weights (parameters) defining the network, and
then recasting the fixed point problems (15) and (16) as potentially more tractable nonlinear least
squares problems. For example we can approximate V as Vϕ̂ where ϕ̂ are the network weights that
solve the nonlinear least squares problem of minimizing the squared Bellman residuals in equation
22

See also Dearing and Blevins (2025) who also proposed a similar iterative procedure called efficient psuedo
likelihood (EPL) that is also an efficient sequential estimator that can estimate parameters of dynamic games.

18

(5).
ρ(θ, ϕ) =

N
X

[Vϕ (sj ) − Γθ,σ (Vϕ )(sj )]2 .

(28)

j=1

Note that the smoothed Bellman operator Γσ defined on the right hand side of (16) depends on r
and p which in turn are function of the model parameters θ, so we write it as Γθ,σ . It follows that
the minimizing parameters ϕ̂ are implicit functions of θ.
Let ρ(θ, ϕ) denote the squared Bellman residuals defined over a grid of N points in the state
space. Then a “nested least squares” estimator similar to NFXP can be used estimate θ in large state
spaces, where we maximize L(θ), but in the inner fixed point problem has been transformed into
the problem of minimizing ρ(θ, ϕ) over the parameters ϕ for each value of the structural parameters
θ. The CCP estimator can also be implemented in a similar fashion where we parametrize R and
Qε by parameters ϕR and ϕε and solve two nonlinear least squares problems to approximate the
fixed points in (24) and (22), respectively. Note, that these would only need to solved once at the
start of estimation, and the resulting solutions Rϕ̂R and Qϕ̂ε can then used to evaluate πθ (a|s) in
(25).
Luo and Sang (2024) introduced a penalized likelihood estimator where θ̂ and ϕ̂ are simultaneously chosen to maximize
(θ̂, ϕ̂) = argmax log(L(θ)) − λρ(θ, ϕ),

(29)

θ,ϕ

where λ ≥ 0 is a penalization parameter. Note that the likelihood depends on both θ and ϕ since
both the CCP π and Q are defined in terms of Vϕ which depends on the network weights, ϕ, in
addition to the structural parameters of interest, θ. The consistency of the penalized likelihood
estimator requires the use of a sieve, i.e the dimension of ϕ must grow to infinity at certain rate with
the sample size to guarantee that the error in approximating the true fixed point by Vϕ converges
to zero. As a result they refer to the estimator (29) as SEES, for Sieve-based Efficient Estimator
for Structural models.23
A drawback of the SEES estimator is that the ϕ parameters determining the value function Vϕ
become nuisance parameters, and for fixed θ the ϕ that maximize (29) ϕ̂ that minimizes the squared
Bellman error ρ(θ, ϕ) will be an implicit function of θ. As a result, computation of the asymptotic
covariance matrix for θ requires inverting an analog of an information matrix for (θ, ϕ) jointly which
can be challenging to do when ϕ is high dimensional. Nguyen (2025) introduced an estimator called
neural network efficient estimator (NNES) that maximizes a penalized criterion similar to the SEES
estimator (29) but in a sequential fashion similar to the NPL estimator of AM, benefitting from
the zero Jacobian property of the NPL estimator and ensuring Neyman orthogonality between
the parameters of interest θ and the nusiance parameters ϕ. NNES is initialized from an initial
non-parametric estimator of the CCPs, π̂, but instead of solving for the implied value function V
23
See Peter Arcidiacono and James (2013) and Kristensen et al. (2021) for other examples of sieve-based estimators
for DDC models.

19

exactly as a system of linear equations (19), it uses a a neural network parameterization of the
value function Vϕ and finds ϕ̂ that minimizes the sum of squared Bellman residuals ρ(θ, ϕ) in (28).
The resulting value function, which also depends on θ (so we write Vθ,ϕ̂ ) is then used to form the
Q̂θ values per (27) which are in turn used to calculated the CCPs πθ (a|s) and the pseudo likelihood
Lπ (θ) following the same approach as the NPL estimator. In essence, NNES is a convex combination
of the NPL and SEES estimators: 1) like NPL it is iterative, starting from an initial nonparametric
estimator π̂, 2) unlike NPL but similar to SEES, it does not solve for Vπ̂ in equation (19) exactly
via standard linear algebra, but rather minimizes the square Bellman residuals ρ(θ, ϕ). The main
benefit of the NNES estimator over SEES is that the zero Jacobian/Neyman orthogonality property
implies that to get the covariance matrix for θ we only have to invert a matrix of the same dimension
as θ rather than take the (θ, θ) block of the inverse of a matrix with dimension equal to the sum
of the number of parameters in θ and ϕ. For flexible and deep neural networks, the dimension of
ϕ can be in the thousands, so this can be a significant advantage.
3.3

The Identification Problem

At its core, structural estimation of DDC models can be regarded as a process of inverting observed
behavior to uncover preferences.24 The observed behavior from the DDC model is captured by the
CCP π(a|s), and it can be viewed as the “reduced form” model of the agent’s behavior since with
enough data on (a, s) pairs, we can estimate π nonparametrically without need for further assumptions. Econometric methods that focus on summarizing observed behavior without attempting to
provide a deeper explanation for that behavior are referred to as reduced-form estimation (RFE).
In the RL/ML literature it is referred to as “behavioral cloning” (BC) “imitation learning” (IM),
or “apprenticeship learning” (AL). The analysis of identification treats π as known because with
infinite data we could learn it perfectly. The preceding section showed how to derive π from the
structure {β, r, p}, a process that we can summarize by the mapping π = f (β, r, p). The identification problem concerns the invertibility of this mapping: given π is there a unique underlying
structure {β, r, p} that implies it? Unfortunately, without further restrictions the answer is negative, as shown by Hotz and Miller (1993), Rust (1994) and Magnac and Thesmar (2002). To
understand why, consider the first step of the inversion process, uncovering Q from π. Using the
24
This inversion process requires a combination of identifying assumptions to ensure a unique solution. The
foundational works in both single-agent DDC and dynamic games exemplify these strategies. Single-Agent DDC :
Rust (1987) imposes parametric functional forms (e.g., linear cost in mileage), assumes rational expectations so that
transition probabilities may be treated as known, and fixes the discount factor (β). To resolve the observational
equivalence wherein only cost differences are identified, local normalization is employed. Rust (1987) notes that
because “the absolute level of c [cost] is not identified,” he must “normalize by setting c(0, θ1 ) = 0” (p. 1015),
thereby anchoring cost at zero mileage. Dynamic Games: Anderson et al. (2025) assume the reward function (r)
is known (normalized to 1 for a win, 0 for a loss), impose stationarity on point outcome probabilities, employ a
parametric logit specification for subjective beliefs, and introduce stochastic trembles (IID Type 1 extreme value
shocks) to rationalize observed mixed strategies. In both cases, imposing restrictions on certain model primitives is
necessary to identify others, rendering an otherwise intractable inverse problem solvable.

20

logit form of π in (18) we have

log π(a|s)/π(a′ |s) = Q(s, a) − Q(s, a′ ),

s ∈ S, a, a′ ∈ A.

(30)

We already see that information on π is insufficient to recover all the Q values: only the differences
in Q are identified but not all |S||A| possible values of Q(s, a). Indeed, the structure {β, r, p}
contains 1 + |S|(|A| − 1) + |S|2 |A| parameters which is more than then |S|(|A| − 1) parameters of π,
so we will generally have “more equations than unknowns” and the underlying structure will only
be partially identified.
Identification requires additional restrictions on {β, r, p}. Empirical studies commonly impose
the assumption that r and p have known parametric functional forms that depend on a relatively
small number of parameters θ. In some situations the reward function can be treated as known,
and this facilitates the identification of subjective beliefs p(s′ |s, a). For example Anderson et al.
(2025) are able to identify the subjective beliefs of professional tennis servers about how their
serve strategies affects their probability of winning a tennis game. These beliefs take the form of
a transition p(s′ |s, a) where s denotes the point state of the game and a denotes serve direction.
Identification of beliefs is possible because it is reasonable to assume r is known: i.e. the server earns
a reward of 1 if they win the game and 0 otherwise, and due to reasonable parametric restrictions
on p.
In many applications researchers are willing to assume agents have rational expectations which
implies that their subjective beliefs about state transitions p(s′ |s, a) correspond to the actual probability governing these transitions and so p can be estimated non-parametrically given sufficient
data, and thus can be treated as known but with restrictions on r this assumption is testable.25
Many studies typically assume that the discount factor β is also known, however under the assumption of rational expectations and restrictions on rewards, β can be identified, see Abbring and
Daljord (2020).
Following the DDC approach of local normalization, and assuming {β, p} are known, identification of r depends on the assumption that either it has a known parametric functional form rθ
where the dimension of θ is less than |S|(|A| − 1), or that for each s ∈ S there is a normalizing
or anchor action as such that r(s, as ) is known. The latter assumption amounts to |S| restrictions
that imply there are only |S|(|A| − 1) unknown rewards to be recovered, the same number of free
values of π. Hotz and Miller (1993) and Kang et al. (2025) show that in this “exactly identified”
case, we can calculate Q(s, as ) from knowledge of r(s, as ) and π(as |s) using equation (20) and then
(30) allows us to recover all remaining Q values. Using the Q values we can back out the remaining
unknown rewards r from the smooth Bellman equation (15).
Note that the assumption that we know r(s, as ) for some anchor action as in each state s ∈ S
is far from innocuous. If this assumption is wrong, even though the DDC model has enough
25

Anderson et al. (2025) strongly reject the hypothesis the many professional tennis servers have rational beliefs
about their own ability and those of their opponent, as embodied by p(s′ |s, a).

21

parameters to perfectly fit π, the estimated rewards will not equal the true rewards. In this case,
counterfactual behavior predicted by the model with an incorrectly identified reward function can
differ from what would actually happen under the true reward. Another way to say this is that
in the absence of any prior restrictions on rewards, we can only identify a set of “observationally
P
equivalent” rewards of the form r(s, a) + h(s) − β s′ h(s′ )p(s′ |s, a) for any function h : S → R.
The set of all of these reward functions is called the partially identified set, and it defines an
inherent limit on what can be learned about agents’ rewards and emphasizes the importance of
having accurate prior knowledge of at least some aspects of the reward function to obtain credible
counterfactual predictions and welfare impacts of changes in policy and the environment. This
class of reward transformations is precisely what the IRL literature, following the seminal work
of Ng et al. (1999), calls potential-based reward shaping. In this framework, the function h(s)
is referred to as a ‘potential function,’ often denoted Φ(s). Any reward function r′ (s, a) created
by adding the difference in potential (βΦ(s′ ) − Φ(s)) to the original reward r(s, a) will yield the
exact same optimal policy π ∗ . This property, where multiple reward functions map to the same
optimal behavior, is known as identification ‘up to policy invariance.’ For many applications in
robotics and AI, such as imitation learning, achieving policy invariance is the end goal; the objective
is to learn a reward function that can replicate an expert’s behavior, not necessarily to uncover
the expert’s true, underlying reward. However, for the goals of structural econometrics—evaluating
welfare, testing economic theories, and predicting behavioral responses to novel policy interventions
(counterfactuals)—this ambiguity is a fundamental problem that must be resolved. Credible welfare
analysis requires the uniquely identified reward function, not just one of many that happens to
rationalize the observed data.
To resolve the identification ambiguity, the DDC and IRL literatures have developed distinct
sets of identifying assumptions, each reflecting the typical problems and goals of the respective
fields. These can be broadly characterized as a local, action-based normalization common in DDC
versus a global, state-space connectivity condition used in IRL. Influential methods in the IRL
literature, particularly Adversarial IRL (AIRL) (Fu et al., 2018a), propose a global condition on
the transition dynamics known as ‘reward-decomposability.’ Intuitively, this assumption requires
that all states in the MDP are ‘linked’—meaning it is possible to eventually transit from any state
to any other state through some sequence of actions. When this condition holds, observing choices
across the entire state space creates a single, interconnected system of reward constraints. This
allows the reward function (often assumed to be state-dependent, r(s)) to be identified globally
up to a single additive constant, without needing to normalize a specific action in every single
state. More recent work by Cao et al. (2021) extends these identifiability results to stochastic
environments and provides conditions under which rewards can be recovered up to potential shaping
transformations. However, a critical distinction for economic applications is that this powerful
identification result for AIRL was originally proven under the restrictive assumption of deterministic
state transitions, where a given state-action pair (s, a) leads to a single, known next state s′ . This

22

assumption is often untenable in economic and social settings, which are inherently stochastic.
For example, in consumer choice, a firm’s marketing action (a) in a given market state (s) does
not lead to a deterministic sales outcome (s′ ); it leads to a distribution over possible outcomes.
Similarly, a patient’s adherence to a treatment plan does not guarantee a specific health trajectory.
While subsequent research has extended the analysis to stochastic environments, identification often
requires imposing strong technical conditions, such as a full-rank requirement on the transition
probability matrix (Cao et al., 2021). This essentially requires that the available actions from
a state are powerful enough to generate linearly independent probability distributions over next
states. This contrasts sharply with the DDC framework, which is designed from the ground up to
accommodate stochasticity as a fundamental feature of the decision-making environment.
In contrast, the structural econometrics literature typically achieves identification through local
normalizations, as we detail next.
Kalouptsidi et al. (2021) provides examples of certain counterfactuals that are identified even
when r is only partially identified. They conclude that their “results call for caution while leaving
room for optimism: although counterfactual behavior and welfare can be sensitive to identifying
restrictions imposed on the model, there exists important classes of counterfactuals that are robust
to such restrictions.” (p. 385).

4

Inverse Reinforcement Learning

The IRL literature was initiated by Ng and Russell (2000) who identified two motivations for inferring the underlying rewards that are presumed to generate observed behavior: 1) “the potential use
of reinforcement learning and related methods as potential models for human and animal learning”
and 2) to provide a reward function that RL can use to construct an “intelligent agent that can
behave successfully in a particular domain.” Though they note that imitation and apprenticeship
learning (IL and AL) can be used to learn a policy π, “the reward function often provides a much
more parsimonius description of behaviour” so that IRL can constitute an effective form of AL. IRL
has become an important method in many areas of robotics including development of autonomous
drones and vehicles (AV) where there is insufficient data on decisions to human drivers under multitudes of different road conditions to develop effective AVs. Wang et al. (2025) note that IRL
has “found great success in predicting trajectories through inferring cost or reward functions from
expert demonstrations, and then using these functions to guide the behavior of self-driving vehicles
in unseen driving environments.”
This section provides a selective review of the IRL literature focusing on methods that overlap
most closely with the structural DDC literature reviewed in section 3. We refer readers to surveys
by Arora and Doshi (2021), Gleave and Toyer (2022), and Adams et al. (2022) for a broader and
more in depth view of IRL. The latter survey provides further examples of how IRL uses “an
expert to demonstrate the successful task and then a highly parameterized reward function could
be transferred to the robot for optimization” and how IRL can generate more effective policies than
23

AL, particularly for new, counterfactual environments where “IRL has the added advantage that
the reward function can be transferred to new environments with different dynamics.”.
There are four broad classes of IRL algorithms: 1) max-margin, 2) Bayesian methods, 3) maximum entropy methods, and 4) adversarial methods. Ng and Russell (2000) introduced three
different types of max-margin estimators, which search for a reward function for which payoffs
under the observed policy are higher than any other policy (i.e. behavior), an approach that shares
similarities with the “moment inequality” simulation estimator proposed by Bajari et al. (2007)
discussed in section 3. Ng and Russell (2000) recognized the identification problem discussed in
the previous section, namely there may be many reward functions that satisfy the max-margin
inequalities (payoff inequalities) including the trivial solution r = 0.26
Bayesian IRL (BIRL) was introduced by Ramachandran and Amir (2007). They assumed π is a
mixed strategy with the softmax form (18) that depends on Q functions which are implicit functions
of r per the Bellman equations (6) and (7) and interpret the σ parameter in the softmax function
for π as a rationality coefficient that governs how sharply the policy concentrates on high-value
actions.27 This setup allowed them to formulate a likelihood for the sequence of observed actions
by the DM that depends on r. Using Bayes’ Rule, they computed a posterior distribution for r,
treating it as the unknown parameter with a prior distribution. Since it is infeasible to directly
compute the posterior, BIRL uses MCMC to generate draws from the posterior distribution, with
policy iteration used to solve for Q for each draw of r. This makes BIRL method computationally
intensive for large state spaces similar to NFXP. Overall BIRL is similar to the Bayesian MCMC
methods discussed in section 3, except that those methods use stochastic updates of Q similar to
those produced by Q-learning to gradually compute Q over the course of the MCMC simulations
rather than use policy iteration to find Q for each MCMC draw of r.
A seminal contribution to the IRL literature is Ziebart et al. (2008), who introduced maximum
entropy IRL as a means of justifying the use of the softmax/logit probability for π(a|s) as the
probability with maximum entropy subject to certain constraints that make expectations of certain
functions known as features equal the sample averages of these features.28 They proposed to
estimate the parameters of a reward function that is a linear combination of a set of known features
using a partial likelihood for observed (a, s) pairs that is identical to the partial likelihood (26)
used in the DDC literature. They applied this method to model the route choices of 25 Yellow cab
drivers in Pittsburgh with a reward function that involves four features: road type, speed, lanes and
transitions. They showed that the estimated model could correctly predict nearly 80% of the cab
26

Building on Ng et al. (1999), who showed the optimal policy is invariant under reward transformations of the
form r′ (s, a) = αr(s, a) + β + γΦ(s′ ) − Φ(s) for α > 0 and potential function Φ, Ng and Russell (2000) termed this
identification “up to policy invariance.” This suffices for imitation learning but not for DDC, which requires unique
identification to enable hypothesis testing and welfare analysis.
27
Small σ makes the policy concentrate almost entirely on the highest-value action, while large σ spreads probability
nearly uniformly across actions. Because the softmax formula depends only on Q/σ, the reward scale and σ cannot
both be identified, so DDC applications typically fix σ = 1 (e.g. Adusumilli and Eckhardt (2025)). When calibration
data are available, Ghosal et al. (2023) show how to estimate β (equivalently σ = 1/β) instead of fixing it.
28
Ziebart et al. (2010) extended these ideas to MDPs and called it maximum causal entropy IRL.

24

paths in a holdout or evaluation sample and that their new method was a significant improvement
over other IRL methods such as max-margin.
A fourth class of IRL methods uses adversarial training, building on Generative Adversarial
Imitation Learning (GAIL). Fu et al. (2018b) introduced Adversarial IRL (AIRL), which extends
GAIL by learning a disentangled reward function that is robust to changes in environment dynamics. AIRL formulates IRL as a two-player game between a policy generator and a discriminator.
The key innovation is structuring the discriminator as f (s, a, s′ ) = gθ (s, a) + γhϕ (s′ ) − hϕ (s),
where gθ (s, a) represents the learned reward function and hϕ is a state-dependent shaping function. This discriminator structure is a practical implementation of the potential-based reward
shaping discussed in Section 3.3, where hϕ (s) plays the role of the potential function. As noted in
our earlier discussion, this approach allows AIRL to achieve identification via the global ‘rewarddecomposability’ assumption, but its foundational proof relies on deterministic dynamics, a key
point of departure from the stochastic environments central to DDC modeling. This decomposition disentangles the reward from dynamics-specific features, enabling learned rewards to transfer
across environments with different transition probabilities p(s′ |s, a). The discriminator is trained
to distinguish expert trajectories from policy-generated trajectories, while the policy maximizes the
learned reward. AIRL achieves identification of the reward function “up to policy invariance” (i.e.,
up to potential-based shaping) without requiring explicit solution of the Bellman equation during
training.29
These ideas evolved into the already cited work of Haarnoja et al. (2017) who characterized π as
the policy that maximizes the expected discounted entropy-regularized payoff given in equation (9).
Various criteria are used to estimate r such as “occupancy matching” (Ho and Ermon (2016), Yue
et al. (2023)). For our purposes we focus on IRL where the likelihood function is the estimation
criterion, such as Ermon et al. (2015), Zeng et al. (2023), Zeng et al. (2024), Barzegary and
Yoganarasimhan (2022) and Kang et al. (2025).30 This results in a nearly complete equivalence
between the DDC and IRL literatures, with identical softmax/logit formulas for the policy π(a|s)
(18) that depend on the choice-specific or “soft Q” values that satisfy the “soft Bellman equation”
in equation (15). Overall, DDC and maximum entropy IRL result in mathematically identical
optimization problems for recovering r from data on states and actions of a sample of DMs. The
main difference is in the algorithms used to solve the DM’s DP problem.
In DDC the Q functions are computed by non-stochastic algorithms such as SA or PI, or in large
state spaces by parametrizing Q or the value function V and finding parameters ϕ that minimize
the squared “Bellman residuals” as in the SEES estimator, (29). All of these methods can be
described as model-based because they require knowledge of the transition probability p(s′ |s, a), or
29
However, Theorem C.1 in Fu et al. (2018b) requires deterministic dynamics: “we also assume we have deterministic dynamics.” Since economic applications typically involve stochastic transitions p(s′ |s, a), this assumption limits
AIRL’s applicability to most DDC problems. Fu et al. (2018b) demonstrate that AIRL achieves comparable performance to GAIL on standard imitation benchmarks but significantly outperforms GAIL on transfer tasks requiring
generalization across different environment dynamics.
30
Zeng et al. (2023) and Zeng et al. (2024) maximize a discounted log-likelihood function.

25

at least p must be estimable from data. Adams et al. (2022) notes that most IRL methods are
model-based. However, we will focus on model-free IRL that does not require specification of a
function form for p or even require that it be explicitly estimated non-parametrically. Instead, new
IRL methods inspired by model-free approaches such as Q-learning are able to approximate the Q
functions using only realizations from p without knowing p itself. But how is it possible to generate
realizations s′ from p(s′ |s, a) without knowing p itself?
Model-free IRL solves this problem in a clever way: it uses already realized transitions in demonstration datasets to provide the “simulator” needed by RL algorithms to train the Q and values
functions. The insight is that the data on observed states and decisions provides the “environment”
and the state transitions needed by RL to find the value and Q functions needed to recover r, reminiscent of the idea of experience replay in the deep Q learning literature, Mnih et al. (2015). To get
a better understanding of these methods, we will provide a more in-depth discussion of two recent
contributions the IRL literature that can recover r from data in a model-free manner. One can be
regarded as an IRL version of the CCP estimator and the other is similar to the SEES estimator
(29). Both of these methods use parametric function approximation methods (expressing V and Q
as outputs of neural networks or linear combinations of a set of basis functions) that enables them
to handle problems with large state spaces.
The RL and SE/DDC literatures use “model-free” and “model-based” differently when analyzing learning from historical data.31
Adusumilli and Eckhardt (2025) (AE) introduce a model-free two step CCP estimator similar
to the one described in the previous section but using RL-inspired methods to avoid estimating
or making parametric assumptions about p(s′ |s, a). They do assume that the reward function is a
P
linear combination of known “features”, i.e. rθ (s, a) = K
k=1 θk rk (s, a). Their estimator is inspired
by the temporal difference (TD) method of RL, and they apply it to approximate the functions R
and Qϵ (defined in equations (22) and (24), respectively) that enter as covariates in the CCP π in
equation (25), using transitions in the data to estimate these functions without having to explicitly
estimate p(s′ |s, a). To accommodate empirical applications with large state spaces they propose
parameterizing R and Qϵ as linear combinations of a set of known basis functions that depend on
(s, a). Let ν(s, a) = {ν1 (s, a), . . . , νJ (s, a)} denote J basis functions that are used to approximate
R and Qε by a regression that uses the basis functions evaluated at values of (s, a) in the data set
as regressors. We will describe AE’s approach to approximating R, since the same procedure is
used to approximate Qε and is omitted for brevity. Let Rϕ denote an approximation to R based
P
on a J × 1 parameter vector ϕ of the form Rϕ (s, a) = ν(s, a)ϕ = Jj=1 θj νj (s, a). AE propose to to
31

We thank an anonymous reviewer for highlighting this important terminological distinction. In RL, an algorithm
is model-free if it uses raw transition tuples (s, a, s′ ) for updates (e.g., TD learning) without explicitly estimating or
representing the transition probability p(s′ |s, a), whereas it is model-based if it explicitly constructs or estimates p
for planning (see Chapter 8 of Sutton and Barto (2020)). In SE/DDC, any method relying on historical data to infer
structure is typically considered “model-based” since, as the reviewer noted, “one can estimate p from the triplets
[(s, a, s′ )] and generate the triplets from p,” making the distinction “quite thin” when both approaches rely on the
same historical transitions. Throughout this article, we follow the RL terminology when describing IRL methods.

26

choose ϕ̂ to minimize the mean-squared TD error given by

ϕ̂ = argmin E [⃗r(s, a) + βRϕ (s′ , a′ ) − Rϕ (s, a)]2 ,

(31)

ϕ

where E denotes the expectation operator over (s, a, s′ , a′ ). Using results from Tsitsiklis and Roy
(1997) on the convergence of TD learning with linear function approximation, AE show that ϕ̂ can
be computed using the sample expectation operator EN in (31) using the formula

−1
ϕ̂ = EN {ν(s, a)[ν(s, a) − βν(s′ , a′ )]T }
EN {ν(s, a)⃗r(s, a)},

(32)

and the implied estimate R̂(s, a) = ϕ(s, a)ϕ̂ of the features or “covariates” for the θ in (25). We also
have to approximate the second “correction term” Q̂ε (s, a), which can be estimated via regression
similar to (32) but it requires a first stage non-parametric estimate of π(a|s) to construct estimates of
the expected choice-specific unobserved shocks E{ε(a)|s, a} = − log(π(a|s)).32 Using the estimated
R̂(s, a) and Q̂ε (s, a) values, they can compute a second stage pseudo-maximum likelihood (PMLE)
estimator of θ by maximizing the partial likelihood (26) using the formula for πθ (a|s) in (25).
Consistency of this first stage estimator requires specification of a sieve with J basis functions
{ν1 , . . . , νJ } that increases with sample size N at an appropriate rate and with sufficient linear
independence to allow any function R to be perfectly approximated by its projection Πν R in the
limit as J → ∞. The PMLE is affected by “estimation noise” in the R̂ and Q̂ε functions that can
introduce bias and noise. To deal with this, AE propose a third estimation stage that uses the
PMLE to create a modified score (i.e. gradient) of the partial log-likelihood (26) to create a robust
(Neyman orthogonal) version of the score function which they used to their preferred estimator
θ̂ as the value that sets the modified score to zero following the approach of Chernozhukov et al.
(2022).
AE proposed a different estimator they call AVI (for Approximate Value Iteration) that allows
for nonlinear parametrizations of the R and Qε functions which are computed using an iterative
procedure for updating the parameter ϕ̂k is the estimated parameters determining R̂k (s, a) =
Rϕ̂k (s, a) as follows
h
i2 
′ ′
.
ϕ̂k+1 = argmin EN ⃗r(s, a) + βRϕ̂k (s , a ) − Rϕ (s, a)

(33)

ϕ

These iterations continue until the sequence {ϕ̂k } converges and the resulting estimator of R is
R̂ = Rϕ̂k where ϕ̂k is the last value of the iterative procedure (33), and similarly for Q̂ε .33 AE
32

AE normalize σ to 1 since it cannot be separately identified from the θ parameters.
It is possible to extend their approach to reward functions rθ (s, a) where θ does not enter as a linear combination
of a set of known features ⃗r(s, a). However in that case, we can no longer express Qr (s, a) = R(s, a) ∗ θ, and in general
θ will enter Qr in a non-linear fashion. The TD estimator can still be adapted to work in this situation except that
now there must be a nested TD subroutine that recomputes Q̂r as a function of θ each time θ is updated in an outer
optimization algorithm that searches over θ to maximize the partial likelihood function (26).
33

27

conclude that “A range of Monte Carlo simulations using a dynamic firm entry problem, a dynamic
firm entry game and two versions of the famous Rust (1987) engine replacement problem show that
the proposed algorithms work well in practice.”34
Kang et al. (2025) developed an estimator they call GLADIUS (Gradient-based Learning with
Ascent-Descent for Inverse Utility learning from Samples) that is 1) model-free, 2) does not require
a first stage non-parametric estimation of π(a|s), and 3) does not require a parametric specification
for rewards. Instead, GLADIUS is an iterative algorithm that uses gradient ascent/descent to
maximize a penalized likelihood function similar to the SEES estimator (29). However instead of
parametrizing r as a function of “structural parameters” θ and using using auxilliary parameters
ϕ to approximate the Q functions, GLADIUS relies on flexible parametrization of the Q function
as Qθ1 (s, a) and the conditional expectation of the value function E{V (s′ )|s, a} as EVθ2 (s, a) for
parameters θ1 and θ2 of flexible approximations to Q and EV such as DNNs. Once GLADIUS
converges, returning parameters θ̂1 and θ̂2 , rewards are estimated as the function
r(s, a) = Qθ̂1 (s, a) − βEVθ̂2 (s, a),

(34)

i.e. they are “backed out” from the fixed point equation for smoothed Q function, (15).
Both GLADIUS and SEES use an objective function that maximizes a penalized likelihood
where the penalty term is a “mean squared Bellman error” for the Q functions. That is, if we express
Q as a fixed point Q = Λσ (Q), Q minimizes the quantity ρBE (Q) = E{[Q(s, a) − Λσ (Q)(s, a)]2 }
over a joint distribution of (s, a) pairs. SEES is a model-based approach that uses an assumed
parametric functional form for rewards, rθ (s, a) and knowledge (or estimated version thereof) of
the transition probability’ p(s′ |s, a) to compute the Bellman operator Λθ,p,σ , where we subscript Λσ
to emphasize its dependence on θ as well as p. Thus, SEES calculates the mean squared Bellman
error ρBE (Q) numerically using deterministic methods such as numerical quadrature to compute
the conditional expectations of the Q functions.
GLADIUS is a model-free approach inspired by Q-learning that uses transitions (s′ , s, a) in the
data to construct an estimate of the mean squared Bellman error ρBE (Q). That is, GLADIUS
seeks to approximate the quantity
Λσ (Q)(s, a) = r(s, a) + β

X

V (s′ )p(s′ |a, d)

(35)

s′

by averaging realizations of the form
Λ̃σ (Q)(s′ , s, a) = r(s, a) + βV (s′ ),

(36)

34
See Khwaja and Srivastava (2025) for an alternative approach to AE’s TD methods that they call RLTD-CCS
that combines the TD algorithm from RL with the Conditional Choice Simulator (CCS) estimator of Hotz et al.
(1994) that relies on forward simulations of paths to produce a Monte Carlo estimate the Qθ (s, a) and hence is a
model-based approach to estimation.

28

using observed (s, a, s′ ) transitions in the sample. It follows that E{Λ̃σ (s′ , s, a)|s, a} = Λσ (Q)(s, a)
so we can use transitions (s′ , s, a) in the data to calculate Λσ (Q)(s′ , s, a) values, and then use
these as dependent variables in a regression to estimate its conditional expectation Λσ (s, a). This
suggests a strategy of estimating Q by searching for θ1 to minimize the mean squared temporal
difference error ρT D (Q) given by
ρT D (Q) = E{[Λσ (Q)(s′ , s, a) − Q(s, a)]2 },

(37)

where, using the terminology of the RL literature, Λ̃σ (Q)(s′ , s, a) − Q(s, a) is the TD error.
However Kang et al. (2025) note an important complication: the true fixed point Q will minimize
the mean squared Bellman error ρBE (Q) but it will not necessarily minimize the mean squared TD
error. To see, this, the note the following identity
ρT D (Q) = ρBE (Q) + β 2 E{[V (s′ ) − EV (s, a)]2 },

(38)

where the second term reflects expected “heteroscedasticity” in the TD error, i.e. it is the average of
the conditional variances given by H(V )(s, a) = E{[V (s′ ) − EV (s, a)]2 |s, a}. Since V is a function
of Q from (16), we write V as V (Q) and the heteroscedasticity term as H(Q). It it follows from (38)
that the Q that minimizes ρT D (Q) will not necessarily be the same as the Q that minimizes ρBE (Q).
To deal with this issue, they express the mean squared Bellman error as ρBE (Q) = ρT D (Q)−H(Q).
Though H(Q) is also an unknown quantity Kang et. al. note that it can be approximated as the
solution to
H(Q)(s, a) = min
v∈R

X
[V (Q)(s′ ) − v]2 p(s′ |s, a).

(39)

s′

Of course the v that minimizes (39) is EV (s, a). Kang et al. (2025) parametrize Q and EV by
DNNs as Qθ1 and EVθ2 , respectively, to obtain an estimation criterion that is a penalized likelihood
function similar to SEES, except it is a max-min problem given by
(θ̂1 , θ̂2 ) = argmax argmin log(L(θ1 )) − λρ(θ1 , θ2 ),
θ1

(40)

θ2

where λ is a penalization parameter, and ρ(θ1 , θ2 ) is the estimate of the mean squared Bellman
error given by
N

1 X
ρ(θ1 , θ2 ) =
[Λσ (Qθ1 (s′i , si , ai ) − Qθ1 (si , ai )]2 − β 2 [V (Qθ1 )(s′i ) − EVθ2 (si , ai )]2
N

(41)

i

Computation of the penalty term can be further reduced to limiting the summation to a subset
of states si where the corresponding action ai equals the normalizing action. The reason is that
Kang et al. (2025) impose the identifying assumption that for each s there is an action as called
the normalizing action for which r(s, as ) is known. From our discussion of identification in section
29

3.2, this restriction on rewards implies that we can determine all Q values by enforcing the fixed
point constraint Q = Λσ (Q) only for the subset of pair (s, as ) which enables us to determine the
corresponding Q at the normalizing action, Q(s, as ) for all s ∈ S. Then given Q(s, as ) the remaining
Q(s, a) values are determined from π(a|s) using the Hotz-Miller inversion formula (30).
Kang et al. (2025) establish an important result on the global convergence of GLADIUS. First,
under a “realizability assumption” that there exists θ1∗ such that Q∗ = Q∗θ∗ , where Q∗ is the true
1

Q function (as well as some other regularity conditions), they show that if Q̂T,N is the estimate of
Q∗ after T iterations of the GLADIUS algorithm using a data set with N observations on agent’s
states and transitions (s′ , s, a), then
n
o
EN [Q∗ (s, a) − Q̂T,N (s, a)]2 ≤ O(1/T ) + O(1/N ).

(42)

They note that “To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has proposed an algorithm that guarantees global optimum convergence of the minimization problem that involves the [mean squared
Bellman residual term]” (see Section 2 for details on this terminology distinction). They compare
GLADIUS to several other DDC estimation methods using the Rust (1987) bus engine problem
and a high-dimensional version of this problem. In the high-dimensional version, they added between 2 and 100 additional irrelevant state variables (i.e., variables that have no effect on cost of
maintaining the bus or its mileage transitions, and thus on the Q values and decision rule π), each
taking on 20 possible values, thus massively increasing the size of the state space. They conclude
that “We find that, on average, our method performs quite well in recovering rewards in both
low and high-dimensional settings. Further, it has better/on-par performance compared to other
benchmark algorithms in this area (including algorithms that assume the parametric form of the
reward function and knowledge of state transition probabilities) and is able to recover rewards even
in settings where other algorithms are not viable.”35
We have provided a very selective survey of the IRL literature, focusing on two recent contributions that are closely related to DDC and offer promising new methods for structural estimation.
We have emphasized the distinction between model-based and model-free estimation methods, but
we wish to make clear that not all IRL methods are model-free. For example Zeng et al. (2024) use
non-parametric methods to estimates p to provide a “generative world model” in a model-based
version of IRL and “Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms existing benchmarks for offline IRL and Imitation Learning, especially on high-dimensional
robotics control tasks.” Thus, it is not obvious that model-free approaches are necessarily superior to model-based approaches, though we agree that good models of p should be used, since
“inaccurate models of the world obtained from finite data with limited coverage could compound
inaccuracy in estimated rewards.” It is also clear that if we are interested in doing a counterfactual
35

Kang et al. (2025) also note GLADIUS corrects a problem in IRL methods that use “occupancy matching” as
the estimation criterion such as Ho and Ermon (2016), Garg et al. (2022), and Yue et al. (2023). They show that
occupancy matching is not guaranteed to consistency estimate the true Q function, and “This implies that r cannot
be inferred from Q using the Bellman equation after deriving Q using occupancy matching.”

30

that involves changing p, model-based methods will probably be necessary to estimate/construct
this new p and then train the model to calculate the new optimal decision rule π(a|s) corresponding
to counterfactual p.
Many IRL variants that appear distinct prove closely related upon examination. Ziebart et al.
(2010)’s maximum causal entropy IRL, for instance, is nearly isomorphic to DDC models under
the AS/CI/EV assumptions discussed in section 3. As Gleave and Toyer (2022) notes: “algorithms
based on MCE IRL have scaled to high-dimensional environments. Maximum Entropy Deep IRL
Wulfmeier et al. (2016) was one of the first extensions, and is able to learn rewards in gridworlds
from pixel observations. More recently, Guided Cost Learning Abbeel (2016) and AIRL have scaled
to continuous control tasks.” Large-scale applications include Barnes et al. (2024) using IRL to infer
route preferences from Google Maps data and Zhao and Liang (2023) applying AIRL to Shanghai
taxi trajectories.36

5

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

The structural estimation and IRL literatures are primarily concerned with recovering an agent’s
underlying reward function from observations of their enacted, often optimal, behavior. A distinct but related paradigm, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), has recently
emerged to address settings where expert demonstrations are either unavailable, prohibitively expensive to collect, or may not represent the true desired behavior. Instead of inverting an observed
policy π to find the reward function that rationalizes it, RLHF learns a reward function directly
by eliciting preferences from a human evaluator over pairs of machine-generated behaviors. While
this approach has become the predominant method for aligning large language models (Ouyang et
al., 2022), its methodology is general and was first demonstrated as a viable technique for training
agents in standard reinforcement learning domains, such as simulated robotics and video games,
without access to an explicit, pre-defined reward function (Christiano et al., 2017).
The canonical RLHF framework is best understood as a three-step process that combines supervised learning, preference modeling, and policy optimization. The objective is to fine-tune a base
policy, typically a large pretrained model, to align its behavior with human judgments. The first
step, supervised fine-tuning (SFT), initializes the policy in a sensible region of the parameter space.
A small, high-quality dataset of human-written demonstrations of the desired task is collected, and
a pretrained policy is fine-tuned via standard maximum likelihood to produce an initial policy,
which we denote π SF T .
The second and central step is the learning of a reward model, rθ (s, y), parameterized by θ.
Note that unlike the per-action rewards r(s, a) in the preceding MDP framework, the reward here
is assigned to a complete trajectory or output y generated from state s. This step directly applies
the principles of discrete choice modeling discussed in Section 3. A dataset D of human preferences
36
The Shanghai application succeeded because road networks provide deterministic transitions and the goal was
matching observed trajectories rather than counterfactual analysis.

31

is collected, consisting of tuples (s, yw , yl ), where s is a context or state, and yw and yl are two
trajectories or outputs generated by the policy, with yw being the ”winner” preferred by the human
evaluator and yl the ”loser.” The reward model rθ is then trained to predict these choices. Assuming
the human preferences can be described by a random utility model, where the latent utility of an
output y in context s is given by rθ (s, y), the probability that yw is preferred over yl can be modeled
using a logit or softmax function. The reward model parameters θ are estimated by minimizing
the negative log-likelihood of the human choices, which corresponds to a binary cross-entropy loss:
L(θ) = −E(s,yw ,yl )∼D [log σ (rθ (s, yw ) − rθ (s, yl ))] ,

(43)

where σ(·) is the logistic sigmoid function. The learned rθ thus serves as a scalar proxy for human
preferences.
In the third and final step, the policy is optimized using reinforcement learning, with the learned
reward model rθ providing the reward signal. The policy, initialized from π SF T , is updated to maximize the expected reward given by rθ . A critical component of this optimization, first introduced
in this context by Ziegler et al. (2019), is the inclusion of a regularization term that penalizes
the divergence of the learned policy, πϕ , from the initial supervised policy, π SF T . The policy is
then optimized to maximize the expected reward from the human-preference model, regularized
by a KL-divergence penalty against the initial policy π SF T . The objective function for the policy
optimization is:
J(ϕ) = Es∼D,y∼πϕ (·|s) [rθ (s, y)] − βKL Es∼D [DKL (πϕ (·|s) || π SF T (·|s))],

(44)

where DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence and βKL is a hyperparameter controlling the strength
of the penalty. The KL-divergence term in this objective serves two essential functions: it acts as an
entropy bonus to encourage exploration and, more importantly, it constrains the policy to remain
close to the distribution of coherent outputs learned during the SFT phase. This prevents the
policy from learning to generate adversarial or out-of-distribution outputs that ”hack” the fixed
reward model by exploiting its imperfections to achieve a high score with degenerate behavior.
While RLHF has proven exceptionally effective at aligning model behavior with human preferences (Stiennon et al., 2020), several open issues remain. The framework does not aim to solve
the identification problem in the strict econometric sense; the learned reward model rθ is a proxy
for preference, not necessarily the uniquely identified ”true” utility function required for welfare
analysis. Furthermore, the notion of ”human feedback” is a significant simplification, as the preferences being optimized are those of a small, non-representative group of paid labelers, raising
important questions about whose values are being embedded in these systems. The practical implementation also presents a substantial operational challenge, as collecting a large, high-quality
dataset of preferences requires a significant investment in both cost and meticulous quality control.
Finally, the fine-tuning process can lead to a degradation of performance on standard academic

32

benchmarks, a phenomenon sometimes referred to as an ”alignment tax.” Mitigating this requires
further methodological refinements, such as mixing pretraining gradient updates into the policy
optimization process, as demonstrated by the PPO-ptx algorithm of Ouyang et al. (2022). Despite
these challenges, RLHF represents a powerful and scalable approach for directing the behavior of
complex generative agents in domains where rewards are difficult to specify but straightforward to
evaluate through comparative judgment.
5.1

Recent Developments: Direct Policy Optimization and Self-Rewarding

Building upon the canonical RLHF framework, recent research has sought to simplify the multistage training pipeline and address the potential instabilities of reinforcement learning. A significant
development in this direction is Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), a method introduced by
Rafailov et al. (2023). DPO reframes the entire alignment problem as a direct supervised learning
task, eliminating the need for an explicitly trained reward model and the complexities of RL-based
policy optimization.
The key insight of DPO is the derivation of a closed-form relationship between the optimal
policy of the KL-regularized reward maximization problem and the underlying reward function
itself. For notational simplicity in the following derivation, we let r(s, y) denote the ground-truth
reward function that the trained model rθ (s, y) aims to approximate. Recall that the theoretical
optimal policy πr for the objective in equation (44) can be expressed in terms of a reference policy
π SF T and the reward function r(s, y) as:
1 SF T
πr (y|s) =
π
(y|s) exp
Z(s)



1
βKL


r(s, y) ,

(45)

where Z(s) is a partition function that depends only on the state s. By rearranging this expression,
the reward function can be reparameterized in terms of the optimal policy πr and the reference
policy π SF T :

r(s, y) = βKL log

πr (y|s)
SF
π T (y|s)


+ βKL log(Z(s)).

(46)

Substituting this reparameterized reward into the preference model loss from equation (43) causes
the state-dependent partition function term βKL log(Z(s)) to cancel out. This yields a loss function
that depends only on the policy π being optimized and the fixed reference policy π SF T . The DPO
loss is thus a simple binary cross-entropy objective over policy likelihoods:
LDP O (ϕ; π

SF T


) = −E(s,yw ,yl )∼D



πϕ (yl |s)
πϕ (yw |s)
− βKL log SF T
log σ βKL log SF T
.
π
(yw |s)
π
(yl |s)

(47)

This objective can be optimized directly on the policy parameters ϕ using standard supervised
learning techniques with a static, offline preference dataset. The gradient of this loss intuitively
increases the likelihood of preferred responses yw while decreasing the likelihood of dispreferred

33

responses yl , relative to the reference policy. By recasting the constrained optimization problem
as a simple likelihood maximization, DPO offers a more stable, computationally efficient, and
easier-to-implement alternative to the multi-stage RLHF pipeline.
A subsequent innovation, Self-Rewarding Language Models, leverages the DPO framework to
create an iterative self-improvement loop that reduces the reliance on static, human-annotated
data (Yuan et al., 2024). In this paradigm, a single language model acts as both the instructionfollowing agent and its own reward model. The process begins with a base model that is finetuned on a seed dataset to learn both instruction-following and evaluation capabilities (LLM-asa-Judge). In each subsequent iteration, the current model generates a new preference dataset for
itself by producing multiple responses to a set of prompts and then evaluating its own outputs
to assign scores. These scores are used to construct preference pairs (yw , yl ), which form an AIgenerated feedback dataset. The model is then fine-tuned on this new dataset using the DPO
loss from equation (47). This iterative process, where the model generates its own training data
and provides its own reward signal, has been shown to create a ”virtuous circle” of improvement,
where enhancements in instruction-following ability lead to better reward modeling, which in turn
fuels the next round of policy improvement. This approach demonstrates a path toward scaling
alignment beyond the limits of human data collection by enabling models to autonomously refine
their own capabilities.

6

Conclusion

We have compared structural DDC estimation, IRL, and RLHF; we now discuss key differences in
their practical applications. An important difference in the IRL and DDC literatures is that the
latter is more focused on statistical inference of the estimated reward function, deriving approximate
distributions for sampling errors. As a result, many DDC applications involve estimation of smaller,
more parsimonious models to gain new insights into human decision making and test behavioral
hypotheses. The IRL literature is more focused on uncovering a reward function that can be used to
train large scale applications using RL. IRL has been used for problems like route choice requiring
estimation of thousands or millions of parameters. The large number of parameters and complexity
of such reward functions makes it challenging to evaluate them from the perspective of statistical
inference and insight into human behavior. However the “proof is in the pudding”: robotic and AI
applications achieve sophisticated behavior after RL training using IRL-learned reward functions
(themselves learned from limited human demonstrations).
Both DDC and IRL literatures have both greatly benefitted from the use of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to approximate value functions in problems with large state spaces. Though it is
still not formally established, the use of DNNs and other function approximation methods do seem
to break Bellman’s “curse of dimensionality” (at least in a practical sense) allowing us to formulate
and estimate increasingly large and more realistic models.
A challenging area for further work is to relax and test the strong rationality assumptions
34

underlying DDC and IRL models. There are two key assumptions: 1) rational expectations (i.e.
the subjective beliefs about the decision-dependent law of motion for state variables coincides with
the true one), and 2) the ability to perfectly optimize given one’s beliefs. If these assumptions do
not hold, rewards inferred from human behavior will be distorted by our attempt to “rationalize”
behavior that may not be fully rational. The notion that human behavior is more likely to be only
“boundedly rational” goes back to the work of Simon (1957), and it is exemplified by the fact that
chess algorithms trained using RL such as Alpha-Zero consistently beat the best human Grand
Masters. RL was able to do this without any need for human data and IRL because 1) the reward
function is known a priori (i.e. 1 if win, 0 if lose), and 2) the algorithm as trained via self-play.
The “model-free” approach to inferring rewards without explicitly specifying beliefs that is used
in some recent work in IRL contrasts largely model-based estimation approach in the DDC literature. Though estimation using fewer assumptions is generally an attribute, model-free estimation
does entail the strong implicit assumption that agents we are modeling have rational expectations.
To the extent that humans are boundedly rational, we would like to understand whether suboptimal behavior is due to distorted or irrational beliefs or the inability to perfectly optimize. In
simpler environments that are less strategically complex than chess, humans may be more likely to
perfectly optimize but if their beliefs are not rational, the resulting behavior will still be suboptimal
from the standpoint of a rational observer.
For example, Anderson et al. (2025) showed that elite tennis professionals use suboptimal serve
strategies, and demonstrated how their behavior can be explained by distorted subjective beliefs
about their own strengths and weaknesses as servers as well as their opponents. This opens a path
for DDC and IRL models to improve human performance using data and model-free approaches that
enables them to correct distorted subjective beliefs. However there are many high stake strategic
situations (e.g. a wartime scenario) where the relevant data may be too scarce, leaving any decision
maker no choice but to rely on an implicit “mental model” of the situation. In such situations
neither DDC nor IRL methods may prove useful because of their dependence on good models of
beliefs. More work needs to be done on how it might be possible to construct relatively accurate
mental models (i.e. beliefs about how different actions affect outcomes), in unique situations where
relevant data is extremely limited.
We conclude that the limitations confronting DDC and IRL are not computational but rather
inherent to inferring rewards and beliefs from data on states and actions, as noted in our discussion
of the identification problem in section 2.4. The solution to the identification problem requires us
to impose strong prior restrictions (assumptions) about rewards and beliefs.
If these assumptions are wrong, counterfactual predictions from these models may not be accurate even though the models may provide a good fit to the demonstration data used to estimate
them. However practical experience suggests that even if our assumptions may not be precisely
correct and human decision makers may not be fully rational, the assumptions used to identify DDC
and IRL models appear to be sufficiently good approximations to produce realistic counterfactual

35

simulations and leverage limited human demonstration data to train artificially intelligent agents to
perform well in tasks previously requiring human expertise. The rapid growth in the DDC and IRL
literatures suggests that despite the limitations and challenges we have noted, these methods have
enormous practical value. We are likely to see continued rapid progress enabling these methods to
be even more widely used to transform economics, finance and artificial intelligence.

36

References
Abbeel, Chelsea Finn Sergey Levine Pieter, “Guided Cost Learning: Deep Inverse Optimal
Control via Policy Optimization,” arXiv, 2016, arXiv:1603.00448v3.
Abbring, Jaap and Øystein Daljord, “Identifying the discount factor in dynamic discrete
choice models,” Quantitative Economics, 2020, 11 (2), 471–501.
Abdelnabi, Sahar, Aideen Fay, Giovanni Cherubin, Ahmed Salem, Mario Fritz, and
Andrew Paverd, “RLHF Deciphered: A Critical Analysis of Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback for LLMs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08555, 2024. Available at https://
arxiv.org/abs/2404.08555.
Adams, Stephen, Tyler Cody, and Peter A. Beling, “A survey of inverse reinforcement
learning,” Artificial Intelligence Review, 2022, 55, 4307–4436.
Adusumilli, Kaun and Dita Eckhardt, “Temporal Difference Estimation of Dynamic Discrete
Choice Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 2025, forthcoming.
Aguirregabiria, Victor and Pedro Mira, “Swapping the nested fixed point algorithm: A class
of estimators for discrete Markov decision models,” Econometrica, 2002, 70, 1519–1543.
and , “Dynamic discrete choice structural models: A survey,” Journal of Econometrics, 2010,
156, 38–67.
Anderson, Axel, Jeremy Rosen, John Rust, and Kin-Ping Wong, “Disequilibrium Play in
Tennis,” Journal of Political Economy, 2025, 133 (1), 190–251.
Arora, Saurabh and Prashant Doshi, “A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges,
methods and progress,” Artificial Intelligence, 2021, 297 (103500).
Atashbar, Tokhir and Yunhui Zhao, “AI and Macroeconomic Modeling: Deep Reinforcement
Learning in an RBC Model,” IMF Working Paper WP/23/040, International Monetary Fund
2023.
Athey, Susan and Guido W. Imbens, “Machine Learning Methods That Economists Should
Know About,” Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11, 685–725.
Azar, Nematollah Ab, Aref Shahmansoorian, and Mohsen Davoudi, “From inverse optimal control to inverse reinforcement learning: A historical review,” Annual Reviews in Control,
2020, 50, 119–138.
Bajari, Patrick, C. Lanier Benkard, and John Levin, “Estimating Dynamic Models of
Imperfect Competition,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (5), 1331–1370.
Barnes, M., M.Abueg, O. F. Lange, M. Deeds, J. Trader, D. Molitor, M. Wulfmeier,
and S. O’Banion, “Massively Scalable Inverse Reinforcement Learning in Google Maps,” OpenReview.net, 2024, pp. 1–22.
Barto, A. G., S. J. Bradtke, and S. P. Singh, “Learning to Act with Real Time Dynamic
Programming,” Artificial Intelligence, 1995, 72, 81–131.

37

Barzegary, Ebrahim and Hema Yoganarasimhan, “A recursive partitioning approach for
dynamic discrete choice modeling in high dimensional settings,” arXiv, 2022, arXiv:2208.01476.
Bayer, Federico A.Bugni Peter Arcidiacono Patrick and Jonathan James, “Approximating High-Dimensional Dynamic Models: Sieve Value Function Iteration,” in Eugene Choo and
Matthew Shum, eds., Structural Econometric Models, Emerald Publishing Ltd., 2013, pp. 44–74.
Bellman, Richard, Dynamic Programming, 4th ed., Princeton University Press, 1957.
and Stuart Dreyfus, “Functional Approximations and Dynamic Programming,” Mathematical
Tables and Other Aids to Computation, 1959, 13 (68), 247–251.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, George Hall, Hitsch Günter J, Giorgio Pauletto, and John Rust,
“A comparison of discrete and parametric approximation methods for continuous-state dynamic
programming problems,” manuscript, Yale University, 2000.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P., Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control (volumes 1 and 2), 4th ed.,
Athena Scientific, Belmont Massachusetts, 2017.
Cao, Haoyang, Samuel N. Cohen, and Lukasz Szpruch, “Identifiability in inverse reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03498, 2021.
Charpentier, Arthur, Romuald Élie, and Carl Remlinger, “Reinforcement Learning in
Economics and Finance,” Computational Economics, 2021, 58, 433–462.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Juan Carlos Escanciano, Hidehiko Ichimura, Whitney K.
Newey, and James M. Robins, “Locally Robust Semiparametric Estimation,” Econometrica, 2022, 90 (4), 1051–1535.
Christiano, Paul F, Jan Leike, Tom B Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario
Amodei, “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in “Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,” Vol. 30 2017.
Dearing, Adam and Jason Blevins, “Efficient and Convergent Sequential Pseudo-Likelihood
Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Choice Games,” Review of Economic Studies, 2025, 92,
981–1021.
Ermon, Stefano, Yexiang Xue, Russell Toth, Bistra Dilkina, Richard Bernstein,
Theodoros Damoulas, Patrick Clark, Steve DeGloria, Andrew Mude, Christopher
Barrett, and Carla P. Gomes, “Learning large-scale dynamic discrete choice models of spatiotemporal preferences with application to migratory pastoralism in East Africa,” Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015, p. 644–650.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue, “Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2002, XL, 351–401.
Fu, Justin, Aviral Kumar, Matthew Soh, and Sergey Levine, “Diagnosing Bottlenecks in
Deep Q-learning Algorithms,” in “Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning” PMLR 2019, pp. 2021–2030.
, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine, “Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse reinforcement learning,” Proceedings of ICLR, 2018, pp. 1—-15.
38

, , and , “Learning Robust Rewards with Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” in
“International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)” 2018.
Fujimoto, Scott, David Meger, Doina Precup, Ofir Nachum, and Shixiang Shane Gu,
“Why Should I Trust You, Bellman? The Bellman Error is a Poor Replacement for Value
Error,” in “Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning” PMLR 2022,
pp. 6907–6935.
Garg, Divyansh, Shuvam Chakraborty, Chris Cundy, Jiaming Song, Matthieu Geist,
and Stefano Ermon, “IQ-Learn: Inverse soft-Q Learning for Imitation,” arXiv, 2022,
arXiv:2106.12142v4.
Ghosal, Gaurav R., Matthew Zurek, Daniel S. Brown, and Anca D. Dragan, “The Effect
of Modeling Human Rationality Level on Learning Rewards from Multiple Feedback Types,” in
“Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence” 2023, pp. 5983–
5992.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Fedor Iskhakov, Anders Munk-Nielsen, John Rust, and Bertel
Schjerning, “Equilibrium Trade in Automobiles,” Journal of Political Economy, 2022, 130 (10),
2534–2593.
Gleave, Adam and Sam Toyer, “A Primer on Maximum Causal Entropy Inverse Reinforcement
Learning,” arXiv, 2022, arXiv:2203.11409v1.
Haarnoja, Tuomas, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine, “Reinforcement
Learning with Deep Energy-Based Policies,” Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2017.
Ho, Jonathan and Stefano Ermon, “Learning large-scale dynamic discrete choice models of
spatio-temporal preferences with application to migratory pastoralism in East Africa,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2016, 29.
Hotz, Joseph V. and Robert A. Miller, “Conditional choice probabilities and the estimation
of dynamic models,” Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60, 497–529.
,
, Seth Sanders, and Jeffrey Smith, “A simulation estimator for dynamic models of
discrete choice,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61, 265–289.
Howard, Ronald A., Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes, Technology Press, Cambridge, MA, 1960.
Igami, Mitsuru, “Artificial Intelligence as Structural Estimation: Economic Interpretations of
Deep Blue, Bonanza, and AlphaGo,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10967, 2017.
Imai, Susumu, Neelam Jain, and Andrew Ching, “Bayesian Estimation of Dynamic Discrete
Choice Models,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (6), 1865–1899.
Iskhakov, Fedor, Jinhyuk Lee, John Rust, Bertel Schjerning, and Kyoungwon Seo,
“Constrained Optimization Approaches to Estimation of Structural Models: Comment,” Econometrica, 2016, 84 (1), 365–370.

39

, John Rust, and Bertel Schjerning, “Recursive Lexicographical Search: Finding All Markov
Perfect Equilibria of Finite State Directional Dynamic Games,” Review of Economic Studies,
2015, 83 (2), 658–703.
, , and , “Machine Learning and Structural Econometrics: Contrasts and Synergies,” The
Econometrics Journal, 2020, 23 (3), S81–S124.
Jeon, Wonseok, Chen-Yang Su, Paul Barde, Thang Doan, Derek Nowrouzezahrai,
and Joelle Pineau, “Regularized Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” OpenReview.net, 2021,
ICLR2021.
Jiang, Nan and Tengyang Xie, “Offline Reinforcement Learning in Large State Spaces: Algorithms and Guarantees,” manuscript, University of Illinois, 2024.
Kalman, R. E., “When is a linear control system optimal?,” Journal of Basic Engineering, 1964,
86, 119–138.
Kalouptsidi, Myrto, Paul T. Scott, and Eduardo Souza-Rodrigues, “Identification of
counterfactuals in dynamic discrete choice models,” Quantitative Economics, 2021, 12 (2), 351–
403.
Kang, Enoch H., Hema Yoganarasimhan, and Lalit Jain, “An Empirical Risk Minimization Approach for Offline Inverse RL and Dynamic Discrete Choice Model,” arXiv, 2025,
arXiv:2502.14131.
Kaufmann, Timo, Paul Weng, Viktor Bengs, and Eyke Hüllermeier, “A Survey of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14925, 2023. Available
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14925.
Keane, Michael P., Petra E. Todd, and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “The Structural Estimation
of Behavioral Models: Discrete Choice Dynamic Programming Methods and Applications,” in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4A, Elsevier, 2011,
pp. 331–461.
Khwaja, Ahmed and Sonal Srivastava, “Reinforcement Learning Based Computationally Faster Conditional Choice Simulation Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models,”
manuscript, Judge Business School, University of Cambridge, 2025.
Kristensen, Dennis, Patrick K. Mogensen, Jong Myun Moon, and Bertel Schjerning, “Solving dynamic discrete choice models using smoothing and sieve methods,” Journal of
Econometrics, 2021, 223, 328–360.
Lucas, Jr. Robert E., “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” in Alan Meltzer, ed., The
Phillips Curve and Labor Markets. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Vol.
1, Elsevier, 1976, pp. 19–46.
Luo, Yao and Peijun Sang, “Efficient Estimation of Structural Models via Sieves,” arXiv, 2024,
arXiv:2204.13488v2.
Machina, Mark J., “Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Solved and Unsolved,” Economic
Perspectives, 1987, 101, 121–154.
40

Magnac, Thierry and David Thesmar, “Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes,”
Econometrica, 2002, 70, 801–816.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Triole, “Markov Perfect Equilibrium: I. Observable Actions,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 2001, 100, 191–219.
McFadden, Daniel L., “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press, 1973, pp. 105–142.
Mnih, V., K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare,
A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and
D. Hassabis, “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, 2015, 518,
518–533.
Mombaur, Katja, Anh Truong, and Jean-Paul Laumond, “From human to humanoid locomotion: an inverse optimal control approach,” Autonomous Robotics, 2010, 28, 369–383.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Jann Spiess, “Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric Approach,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (2), 87–106.
Muth, John F., “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,” Econometrica,
1961, 29 (3), 315–335.
Ng, Andrew Y. and Stuart Russell, “Algorithms for Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, 2000, p. 663–670.
, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell, “Policy Invariance Under Reward Transformations:
Theory and Application to Reward Shaping,” in “Proceedings of the Sixteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning” 1999, pp. 278–287.
Nguyen, Hoang, “Neural Networks for Efficient Estimation of High-Dimensional Dynamic Discrete Choice Models,” manuscript, Georgetown University, 2025.
Norets, Andriy, “Inference in Dynamic Discrete Choice Models With Serially orrelated Unobserved State Variables,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (5), 1665–1682.
Osa, T., J. Pajarinen, G. Neumann, J. A. Bagnell, P. Abbeel, and J. Peters, “An
Algorithmic Perspective on Imitation Learning,” Foundations and Trends in Robotics, 2018, 7,
1–179.
Ouyang, Long, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in “Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,” Vol. 35 2022, pp. 27730–27744.
Puterman, Martin L., Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming,
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
and Shelby L. Brumelle, “On the Convergence of Policy Iteration in Stationary Dynamic
Programming,” Mathematics of Operations Research, 1979, 4, 60–69.

41

Rafailov, Rafael, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn, “Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly
a Reward Model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023. Available at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2305.18290.
Ramachandran, Deepak and Eyal Amir, “Bayesian Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” Proceedings IJCAI, 2007, p. 2586–2591.
Robbins, H. and S. Munro, “A Stochastic Approximation Method,” Annals of Statistics, 1951,
22, 400–407.
Russell, Stuart J. and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach, 4th ed.,
Pearson, 2022.
Rust, John, “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold
Zurcher,” Econometrica, 1987, 55 (5), 993–1033.
, “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Discrete Control Processes,” SIAM Journal on Control
and Optimization, 1988, 26 (5), 1006–1024.
, “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in R. Engle and D. McFadden, eds.,
The Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 4, Elsevier, 1994, pp. 3082–3139.
Samuelson, Paul, “A Note on Measurement of Utility,” Review of Economic Studies, 1937,
pp. 155–161.
Sargent, Thomas J., “Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under Rational Expectations,” Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86 (6), 1009–1044.
Silver, David, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew
Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel,
Timothy Lillicrap, Karen Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis, “A general reinforcement
learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play,” Science, 2018, 362,
1140–1144.
Simon, Herbert A., Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative Organization, 2nd ed., Macmillan, New York, 1957.
Stiennon, Nisan, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss,
Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano, “Learning to summarize from human
feedback,” in “Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,” Vol. 33 2020, pp. 3008–3021.
Su, Che-Lin and Kenneth L. Judd, “Constrained Optimization Approaches to Estimation of
Structural Models,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (5), 2213–2230.
Sutton, Richard J. and Andrew G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning An Introduction, 2nd ed.,
MIT Press, 2020.
Sutton, Richard S. and Andrew G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning An Introduction, 1st ed.,
MIT Press, 1998.

42

Tsitsiklis, John N., “Asynchronous Stochastic Approximation and Q-Learning,” Machine Learning, 1994, 16, 185–202.
and Benjamin Van Roy, “An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function approximation,” IEEE transactions on automatic control, 1997, 42, 674–690.
van Cranenburgh, Sander, Shenhao Wang, Akshay Vij, Francisco Pereira, and Joan
Walker, “Choice Modelling in the Age of Machine Learning,” Journal of Choice Modelling, 2022,
42, 100340.
von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern, The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,
Princeton University Press, 1944.
Wang, Siyue, Zhaorun Chen, Zhuokai Zhao, Chaoli Mao, Yiyang Zhou, Jiayu He,
and Albert Sibo Hu, “ESCIRL: Evolving Self-Contrastive IRL for Trajectory Prediction in
Autonomous Driving,” 8th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2024), 2025, pp. 1–20.
Watkins, C. J. C. H., Learning from Delayed Rewards, PhD Thesis, Kings College, Cambridge
UK, 1989.
and Peter Dayan, “Technical Note: Q-Learning,” Machine Learning, 1992, 8, 279–282.
Wulfmeier, Markus, Peter Ondrúška, and Ingmar Posner, “Maximum Entropy Deep Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” arXiv, 2016, arXiv:1507.04888v3.
Yuan, Weizhe, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing
Xu, and Jason Weston, “Self-Rewarding Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020,
2024. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.10020.
Yue, Sheng, Guanbo Wang, Wei Shao, Zhaofeng Zhang, Sen Lin, Ju Ren, and Junshan
Zhang, “CLARE: Conservative Model-Based Reward Learning for Offline Inverse Reinforcement
Learning,” in “The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations” 2023.
Zeng, Siliang, Chenliang Li, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong, “When Demonstrations
Meet Generative World Models: A Maximum Likelihood Framework for Offline Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
, Mingyi Hong, and Alfredo Garcia, “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes
in High-Dimensional State Space with Finite-Time Guarantees,” Operations Research, 2024, 73
(2).
Zhao, Zhan and Yuebing Liang, “A deep inverse reinforcement learning approach to route
choice modeling with context-dependent rewards,” Transportation Research Part C, 2023, 149.
Ziebart, Brian D., Andrew Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey, “Maximum
Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 2008, 55 (5), 1433–1438.
, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey, “Modeling Interaction via the Principle of Maximum Causal Entropy,” Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning,
2010.

43

Ziegler, Daniel M, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario
Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving, “Fine-tuning language models from human
preferences,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.

44

